=== Q6 [row=2345] topic=Digestion and Absorption ===
  Q: Oxyntic cells (iii) Milk proteins 4. Fructose (iv) Trypsinogen 1 234
  O1: (iii) (iv) (ii) (i)
  O2: (iv) (iii) (i) (ii)
  O3: (iv) (iii) (ii) (i)
  O4: (iii) (iv) (i) (ii)
  ANS: 4.0
  EXPL: The correct matches are

=== Q7 [row=2346] topic=Digestion and Absorption ===
  Q: Fructose is absorbed by facilitated transport into the blood capillaries. 154 27 Identify the cells whose secretion protects the lining of gastrointestinal tract from various enzymes.
  O1: Goblet cells
  O2: Oxyntic cells
  O3: Duodenal cells
  O4: Chief cells
  ANS: 1.0
  EXPL: Secretions of goblet cells protect the lining of gastrointestinal tract from various enzymes. These cells secrete mucus which along with bicarbonate ions  c  Cholecystokinin (CCK) and secretin are the peptide hormones that stimulate the production of pancreatic juice and bicarbonates within the alimentary canal. Secretin acts on the exocrine pancreas and stimulates the secretion of water and bicarbonate ions. CCK acts on both pancreas and gall bladder and stimulates the secretion of pancreatic enzymes and bile juice respectively. Hence, option (c) is transport of the molecules or ions across a biological membrane via specific transmembrane integral protein. 34 Select the correct match of the digested products in humans given in column I with their absorption site and mechanism in column II. [NEET 2013] Column I Column II helps in the lubrication and protection of the mucosal epithelium from the excoriation by the highly concentrated correct. 31 The enzyme that is not present in (a) Glycine and glucose (b) Fructose and Small intestine and active absorption HCl. On the other hand, oxyntic or parietal cells secrete hydrochloric acid. succus entericus is Na +Small intestine passive absorption Chief cells or peptic cells secrete proenzymes-pepsinogen and prorenin. 28 Which of the following options best represents enzyme composition of [CBSE AIPMT 2015] (a) maltase (b) nucleases (c) nucleosidase (d) lipase  b  Succus entericus or intestinal digestive (c) Glycerol and fatty acids (d) Cholesterol and maltose  a  Duodenum and move as chilomicrons Large intestine and active absorption pancreatic juice? [NEET 2017] (a) Amylase, peptidase, trypsinogen, rennin (b) Amylase, pepsin, trypsinogen, maltase (c) Peptidase, amylase, pepsin, rennin (d) Lipase, amylase, trypsinogen, procarboxypeptidase  d  Pancreas consist of exocrine and endocrine part. Exocrine part secrets alkaline pancreatic juice. This juice contains trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, procarboxypeptidase, lipase, amylase, elastase. Concept Enhancer Renin and pepsin enzymes are present in gastric juice. Maltase is present in the intestinal juice. 29 In the stomach, gastric acid is secreted by the [NEET 2016, Phase I] (a) parietal cells (b) peptic cells (c) acidic cells (d) gastrin secreting cells  a  In stomach, gastric acid (HCl) is secreted by parietal cells of gastric gland. It makes the medium of food in stomach acidic for stimulation of proteolytic enzymes of stomach. 30 Which hormones do stimulate the production of pancreatic juice and bicarbonate? [NEET 2016, Phase II] (a) Angiotensin and epinephrine (b) Gastrin and insulin (c) Cholecystokinin and secretin (d) Insulin and glucagon juice contains a variety of enzymes like disaccharidases (e.g. maltase), dipeptidases, lipases, nucleosidases. Nucleases are enzymes present in pancreatic juice that break nucleic acids into nucleotides. 32 The initial step in the digestion of milk in humans is carried out by? [CBSE AIPMT 2014, 11] (a) Lipase (b) Trypsin (c) Rennin (d) Pepsin  d  In humans, the milk protein digesting enzyme in stomach is pepsin. In calves it is rennin. It is also present in small amounts in human infants but not adults. Pepsin acts on water soluble ‘caseinogen (milk protein) to form soluble ‘casein’. This combines with calcium salts to form insoluble calcium paracaseinate, which gets readily digested enzymatically. 33 Fructose is absorbed into the blood through mucosa cells of intestine by the process called [CBSE AIPMT 2014] (a) active transport (b) facilitated transport (c) simple diffusion (d) co-transport mechanism  b  Fructose is absorbed into the blood through mucosa cells of intestine by the process called facilitated transport thus, facilitated transport is the process of spontaneous passive Amino acids, monosaccharides like glucose, electrolytes like Na + are absorbed into the blood by active transport. Fructose and some amino acids are absorbed with the help of the carrier ions like Na + by facilitated transport. Fatty acid and glycerol cannot be absorbed into the blood. They are first incorporated into small droplets called micelles, which move into the intestinal mucosa. 35 If for some reason our goblet cells are non-functional, this will adversely affect [CBSE AIPMT 2010] (a) production of somatostatin (b) secretion of sebum from the sebaceous glands (c) maturation of sperms (d) smooth movement of food down the intestine  d  Goblet cells are something like a wineglass that present in the columnar epithelium of the mammalian intestine and secrete mucin, a mucoprotein that forms mucus when in solution. If Goblet cells become non-functional, this will adversely affect smooth movement of food down the intestine due to the absence of mucin. 36 Carrier ions like Na + facilitate the absorption of substance like [CBSE AIPMT 2010] (a) amino acids and glucose (b) glucose and fatty acids (c) fatty acids and glycerol (d) fructose and some amino acids Digestion and Absorption 155  d  Active transport occurs with the help of energy, usually against concentration gradient. For this, cell membrane possesses carriers and gated channels. Active transport of one substance is often accompanied by permeation of other substances. The phenomenon is called secondary active transport. It is of two main types, i.e. Co-transport, (e.g. glucose and some amino acids along with inward pushing of excess Na +) and counter transport (Ca and H 2 + + movement outwardly as excess Na + passes inwardly). 37 A young infant may be feeding entirely on mother’s milk, which is white in colour but the stools, which the infant passes out is quite yellowish. What is this yellow colour due to? [CBSE AIPMT 2009] (a) Intestinal juice (b) Bile pigments passed through bile juice (c) Undigested milk protein casein (d) Pancreatic juice poured into duodenum  b  The stools, which the infant passes out is quite yellowish due to the bile pigments. These bile pigments are released in the bile juice. 38 Which one of the following pairs of food components in humans reaches the stomach totally undigested? [CBSE AIPMT 2009] (a) Protein and starch (b) Starch and fat (c) Fat and cellulose (d) Starch and cellulose  c  In humans, starch is digested in buccopharyngeal cavity. Cellulose is not digested in the hum b ecause cellulose containsβ-1, 4-linkage and vertebrates themselves do not possess any enzyme capable of hydrolysingβ-1, 4-linkages. Protein is digested in stomach and fat in small intestine. Thus, in the given options, fat and cellulose reach totally undigested in the stomach of humans. 39 Which one of the following statement is true regarding digestion and absorption of food in humans? [CBSE AIPMT 2009] (a) Oxyntic cells in our stomach secrete the proenzyme pepsinogen (b) Fructose and amino acids are absorbed through intestinal mucosa with the help of carrier ions likeNa + (c) Chylomicrons are small lipoprotein particles that are transported from intestine into blood capillaries (d) About 60% of starch is hydrolysed by salivary amylase in our mouth  c  Chylomicrons are lipoprotein particles synthesised by intestinal epithelial cells and consisting mainly of triglycerides. Chylomicrons are the form, in which dietary fat is transported in the circulatory system. 40 Which one of the following is the correct matching of the site of action on the given substrate, the enzyme acting upon it and the end product? [CBSE AIPMT 2008] (a) Duodenum: Triglycerides trypsin monoglycerides (b) Small intestine: Starchα-amylase disaccharide (maltose) (c) Small intestine: Proteins pepsin amino acids (d) Stomach: Fats, Lipase micelles  b  In small intestine food meats with the pancreatic juice containingα-amylase, which converts starch into maltose, isomaltose andα-dextrins in small intestine. Starch Maltose Pancreatic -amylase ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯→ α (disaccharide) The pancreatic juice also contains proenzymes trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen and procarboxypeptidase. The trypsinogen is converted to active trypsin in intestine by enterokinase of intestinal juice. The trypsin converts proteins into large peptides and the large peptides are converted to dipeptide and amino acids by carboxypeptidase. 41 What will happen if the secretion of parietal cells of gastric glands is blocked with an inhibitor? [CBSE AIPMT 2008] (a) Gastric juice will be deficient in chymosin (b) Gastric juice will be deficient in pepsinogen (c) In the absence of HCl secretion, inactive pepsinogen is not converted into the active enzyme pepsin (d) Enterokinase will not be released from the duodenal mucosa and so trypsinogen is not converted to trypsin  c  The parietal cells (oxyntic cells) are large and most numerous on the side walls of gastric glands. These secrete hydrochloric acid and castle intrinsic factor. The peptic cells (zymogen) of gastric glands secrete gastric digestive enzymes as proenzymes-pepsinogen and prorennin and small amount of gastric amylase and gastric lipase. The hydrochloric acid maintains a strongly acidic pH of about 1.5-2.5 in the stomach. HCl converts pepsinogen and prorennin to pepsin and rennin respectively. 42 Secretin and cholecystokinin are digestive hormones. They are secreted in [CBSE AIPMT 2005] (a) oesophagus (b) ileum (c) duodenum (d) pyloric stomach  c  Secretin and cholecystokinin (CCK) are two main gastrointestinal (GI) hormones secreted in duodenum of alimentary canal. CCK stimulates gall bladder contraction and thus increases the flow of bile salts into the intestine. Secretin stimulates the release of an alkaline pancreatic fluid that neutralises stomach acid as it enters the intestine. 43 Duodenum has characteristic Brunner’s glands which secrete two hormones called [CBSE AIPMT 2004] (a) kinase, oestrogen (b) secretin, cholecystokinin (c) prolactin, parathormone (d) estradion, progesterone  b  Brunner’s gland secrete large amount of mucus and bicarbonates to protect duodenal mucosa and to neutralise the acidic chyme. It also secretes two hormones : (a) Secretin (b) Cholecystokinin (CCK) These stimulate: (i) Secretion of pancreatic juice by pancreas. (ii) Release of bile from gall bladder. (iii) Formation of bile by liver and pancreatic juice. 156 44 During prolonged fasting, in what sequence are the following organic compounds used up by the body? [CBSE AIPMT 2003] (a) First carbohydrates, next proteins and lastly lipids (b) First proteins, next lipids and lastly lcarbohydrates (c) First carbohydrates, next fats and lastly proteins (d) First fats, next carbohydrates and lastly proteins  c  During prolonged fasting, first of all carbohydrates are utilised which include glycogen stored in liver. This is followed by the breakdown of adipose tissue, thus providing lipids and lastly the body utilises proteins. 45 A certain person eats boiled potato; one of the food component in it is [CBSE AIPMT 2000] (a) lactose which is indigestible (b) starch which does not get digested (c) cellulose which is digested by intestinal cellulase (d) DNA which gets digested by pancreatic DNAase  d  Anything which cannot be digested cannot serve as ‘food’. Therefore, starch and lactose in the present case have been automatically deleted. Cellulose cannot be digested by human beings, thus option (c) also stands rejected. Pancreatic juice can digest DNA which is the component of every cell. 46 Cholecystokinin and duocrinin are secreted by [CBSE AIPMT 1999] (a) adrenal cortex (b) thyroid gland (c) pancreas (d) intestine  d  Both cholecystokinin and duocrinin are hormones secreted by the intestine, while the former stimulates the gall bladder to release bile and pancreas to release enzyme mixture, the latter regulates the release of mucus from Brunner’s glands. 47 Which part of body secretes the hormone secretin? [CBSE AIPMT 1999] (a) Oesophagus (b) Duodenum (c) Stomach (d) Ileum  b  Secretin is a polypeptide hormone secreted by the mucosa of duodenum and jejunum. It perform two functions : (a) It stimulates sodium bicarbonate from the pancreas which neutralises the acid in the chyme so that it will not damage the wall of the small intestine. (b) It increases the rate of bile secretion in the liver. 48 The hormone that stimulates the stomach to secrete gastric juice is [CBSE AIPMT 1998] (a) gastrin (b) renin (c) enterokinase (d) enterogasterone  a  The stomach controls the production of gastric juice by means of a digestive hormone called gastrin. It is produced by endocrine (hormone secreting) cells that are scattered throughout the epithelium of the stomach. 49 Lactose is composed of [CBSE AIPMT 1998] (a)glucose+ fructose (b)glucose + glucose (c)glucose + galactose (d) fructose + galactose  c  Lactose(C H O ) 12 22 11 is a disaccharide found in mammalian milk. It comprises galactose and glucose units which are linked together byβ, 1-4 glycosidic bonds. It is a reducing sugar. 50 In vertebrates lacteals are found in (a) ileum [CBSE AIPMT 1998] (b) ischium (c) oesophagous (d) ear  a  Lacteals are found in ileum they are lymph vessels draining villi of vertebrate small intestine. After digestion, reconstituted fats are released into lacteals as chylomicrons. 51 The contraction of gall bladder is due to [CBSE AIPMT 1998] (a) gastrin (b) secretin (c) cholecystokinin (d) enterogasterone  c  Cholecystokinin (also called pancreozymin) is a hormone of mucosa of small intestine. It is released in response to chyme. It causes pancreas to release pancreatic enzymes and gall bladder to eject bile. 52 If pancreas is removed, the compound which remain undigested is [CBSE AIPMT 1997] (a) carbohydrates (b) fats (c) proteins (d) All of these  d  Pancreas secretes pancreatic juice which contain enzymes that acts on proteins, carbohydrates and fats. Enzymes of pancreatic juice are (a) Pancreatic amylase which acts on starch and glycogen (polysaccharides). (b) Trypsin, chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidases, which act on proteins and lipase which acts on triglycerides and converts it into fatty acids and glycerol. If pancreas is removed from the body, the digestion of all these would not occur. 53 Which one of the following vitamin can be synthesised by bacteria inside the gut? [CBSE AIPMT 1997] (a) B1 (b) C (c) D (d) K  d  Vitamin-K2 (menaquinone) It is formed by bacteria in the gut, while vitamin-K1 (phylloquinone) is found in green plant leaves. Vitamin-B1 (thiamine) It acts as TPP-coenzyme for decarboxylases. Vitamin-C (ascorbic acid). It helps in development of teeth gums and maintenance of capillary wall. Vitamin-D (calciferol). It helps in maintenance of calcium and phosphorus balance within the body. 54 Which one of the following is a matching pair of a substrate and its particular digestive enzyme? [CBSE AIPMT 1996] (a) Maltose — Maltase (b) Lactose — Rennin (c) Starch — Steapsin (d) Casein — Chymotrypsin Digestion and Absorption 157  a  Intestinal juices contain a number of oligosaccharidase which hydrolyse the specific oligosaccharides into their monosaccharides. Maltase is one of them, which hydrolyses maltose into two glucose molecules. 55 The enzyme enterokinase helps in the conversion of [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) pepsinogen into pepsin (b) trypsinogen into trypsin (c) caseinogen into casein (d) proteins into polypeptides  b  Enterokinase helps in conversion of trypsinogen into trypsin in small intestine, which is an endoproteolytic enzyme and hydrolyses the peptones and proteoses into peptides. 56 Rennin acts on [CBSE AIPMT 1994, 2000] (a) milk changing casein into calcium paracaseinate at 7.2–8.2 pH (b) protein in stomach (c) fat in intestine (d) milk changing casein into calcium paracaseinate at 1-3 pH  d  Stomach secretes gastric juice pH [1–3.5] which contains prorennin secreted by the zymogen cells. Inactive prorennin is converted into rennin by HCl. Rennin acts on casein, a protein milk changing it into calcium paracaseinate, it is known as curdling of milk. 57 Inhibition of gastric and stimulation of gastric, pancreatic and bile secretions are controlled by hormones [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) gastrin, secretin, enterokinin and cholecystokinin (b) enterogasterone, gastrin, pancreozymin and cholecystokinin (c) gastrin, enterogasterone, cholecystokinin and pancreozymin (d) secretin, enterogasterone, gastrin and enterokinin  b  Enterogasterone hormone secreted by mucosa of duodenum inhibits secretion of gastric juices and slows down the gastric movements. Gastrin is the hormone secreted by G-cells/argentaffin cells of pyloric region of stomach and stimulates the gastric glands to secrete gastric juices. Pancreozymin is secreted by mucosa of duodenum and stimulates the acinal cells of pancreas to secrete pancreatic enzymes. Cholecystokinin is secreted by cells of mucosa of duodenum and stimulates contraction of gall bladder to release bile. 58 Most of the fat digestion occurs in [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) rectum (b) stomach (c) duodenum (d) small intestine  d  Fats are emulsified in small intestine by the detergent action of bile salts. Emulsification of fat converts large fat droplets into large number of small droplets, which provide larger surface area to lipases. Then pancreatic lipase (steapsin) which is principal fat digesting enzyme, digest about 2/3rd of fats in these stages. Then intestinal lipase hydrolyses some tri, di and monoglycerides to fatty acids and glycerol molecules. So, the most of fat digestion occurs in small intestine. 59 Secretion of gastric juice is stopped by [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) gastrin (b) pancreozymin (c) cholecystokinin (d) enterogasterone  d  Enterogasterone is produced by small intestine and slows down the secretion of gastric juice and decreases the gastric movements. 60 Where is protein digestion accomplished? [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) Stomach (b) Ileum (c) Rectum (d) Duodenum  b  The cells that line the ileum contain the protease and carbohydrase enzymes responsible for the final stages of protein and carbohydrate digestion. These enzymes are present in the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells. 61 Release of pancreatic juice is stimulated by [CBSE AIPMT 1990, 89] (a) enterokinase (b) cholecystokinin (c) trypsinogen (d) secretin  d  Secretin is secreted byδ-cells of mucosa of duodenum which stimulates pancreas and controls the volume of pancreatic juice including water and electrolytes. 62 Pancreas produces [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) three digestive enzymes and one hormone (b) three digestive enzymes and two hormones (c) two digestive enzymes and one hormone (d) three digestive enzymes and no hormone  b  Pancreas produces pancreatic juice which contains trypsinogen, chymotrypsin, carboxypeptidases, lipase, pancreaticα-amylase, elastage, nucleases. Out of these enzymes, the first three are concerned with protein digestion which finally converts protein into small peptides. Pancreas also secretes insulin and glucagon hormones which acts antagonastically in controlling the blood sugar level. 63 Emulsification of fat will not occur in the absence of [CBSE AIPMT 1990] (a) lipase (b) bile pigments (c) bile salts (d) pancreatic juice  c  Bile is a watery greenish fluid containing bile salts, bile pigments, cholesterol and phospholipid. Bile salts play an important role in digestion of fats. Therefore in their absence emulsification of fat cannot take place. TOPIC 3 Nutritional and Digestive Disorders 64 Kwashiorkor disease is due to [NEET (Odisha) 2019] (a) simultaneous deficiency of proteins and fats (b) simultaneous deficiency of protein and calories (c) deficiency of carbohydrates (d) protein deficiency not accompanied by calorie deficiency 158  d  Kwashiorkor disease is due to protein deficiency not accompanied by calorie deficiency in the children of age 1-5 years. It’s symptoms are weak muscle, thin limbs, retarded growth of the body and brain, swelling of legs due to retention of water (oedema), reddish hair, pot belly, etc. 65 Good vision depends on adequate intake of carotene rich food. Select the best option from the following statements. [NEET 2017] I. Vitamin-A derivatives are formed from carotene. II. The photopigments are embedded in the membrane discs of the inner segment. III. Retinal is a derivative of vitamin-A. IV. Retinal is a light absorbing part of all the visual photopigments. (a) (I) and (II) (b) (I), (III) and (IV) (c) (I) and (III) (d) (II), (III) and (IV)  b  Vitamin-A is a group of unsaturated nutritional organic compounds that includes retinol, retinal, retinoic acid and β-carotene. Vitamin-A is needed by the retina of eye in the form of retinal, which combines with protein opsin to form rhodopsin, the light absorbing molecule. 66 Anxiety and eating spicy food together in an otherwise normal human, may lead to [CBSE AIPMT 2012] (a) indigestion (b) jaundice (c) diarrhoea (d) vomiting  a  Unhealthy eating habits together with anxiety, stress or panic attacks may cause indigestion, stomach ache, stomach palpitations, nausea, etc. 67 When breast feeding is replaced by less nutritive food low in proteins and calories; the infants below the age of one year are likely to suffer from [CBSE AIPMT 2009] (a) marasmus (b) rickets (c) kwashiorkor (d) pellagra  c  Prolonged starvation causes marasmus disease due to a generalised wasting of body because of both energy and protein deficiency. The body becomes lean and weak, eyes depressed and skin wrinkled. Kwashiorkor is a disease caused by continued deficiency of proteins in diet although energy intake may be adequate. Rickets (in children) occurs due to the deficiency of vitamin-D. Pellagra occurs due to the deficiency of nicotinamide (vitamin-B5 ). 68 Which one of the following is a fat-soluble vitamin and it’s related deficiency disease ? [CBSE AIPMT 2007] (a) Ascorbic acid — Scurvy (b) Retinol — Xerophthalmia (c) Cobalamine — Beri-beri (d) Calciferol — Pellagra  b  Xerophthalmia is caused due to the deficiency of vitamin-A (retinol). Retinol and calciferol are fat soluble vitamins but pellagra is not the deficiency disease of calciferol. 69 A patient is generally advised to specially, consume more meat, lentils, milk and eggs in diet only when he suffers from [CBSE AIPMT 2005] (a) kwashiorkor (b) rickets (c) anaemia (d) scurvy  a  The deficiency of proteins within the body is responsible for a disease, known as kwashiorkor. So, a kwashiorkor diseased patient is generally advised to specially, consume more meat, lentils, milk and eggs because these are rich sources of protein. 70 Which group of three of the following five statements (A–E) contains all three correct statements regarding beri-beri ? [CBSE AIPMT 2005] A. A crippling disease prevalent among the native population of sub-Sahara Africa. B. A deficiency disease caused by lack of thiamine (vitamin-B1). C. A nutritional disorder in infants and young children when the diet is persistently deficient in essential protein. D. Occurs in those countries where the staple diet is polished rice. E. The symptoms are pain from neuritis, paralysis, muscle wasting, progressive oedema, mental deterioration and finally heart failure. (a) A, B and D (b) B, C and E (c) A, C and E (d) B, D and E  d  The deficiency of vitamin-B1 or thiamine causes the disease beri-beri. This disease occurs in those countries where the staple diet is polished rice. The symptoms of this disease are pain from neuritis, paralysis, muscle wasting, progressive oedema, mental deterioration and finally heart failure. 71 Which one of the following is the correct matching of a vitamin, its nature and its deficiency disease ? [CBSE AIPMT 2004] (a) Vitamin-A—Fat soluble—Night blindness (b) Vitamin-K—Fat soluble—Beri-beri (c) Vitamin-A—Fat soluble—Beri-beri (d) Vitamin-K—Water soluble—Pellagra  a  Fat soluble vitamins are A, D, E and K. Deficiency of vitamin-A leads to night blindness or nyctalopia because vitamin-A is essential for synthesis of visual pigments (rhodopsin). 72 Which one of the following pairs is not correctly matched? [CBSE AIPMT 2003, 04] (a) Vitamin-B12 — Pernicious anaemia (b) Vitamin-B1 — Beri-beri (c) Vitamin-C — Scurvy (d) Vitamin-B2 — Pellagra  d  Pellagra (Italian Pelle = skin, agra = rough) is a skin disease which is caused by the deficiency of vitamin-B3 or niacin. Pellagra is especially frequent among the people eating food with low tryptophan (an essential amino acid). Digestion and Absorption 159 73 Stool of a person contains whitish grey colour due to malfunction of which type of organ ? [CBSE AIPMT 2002] (a) Pancreas (b) Spleen (c) Kidney (d) Liver  d  Bilirubin is broken down to urobilinogen and stereobilinogen. Yellowish brown colour of stool is due to the stereobilinogen. Due to the malfunctioning of liver, insufficient production of stereobilinogen leads to white stool. 74 In a person of advanced age, the hair become thinner gradually. It happens because of decrease in [CBSE AIPMT 2000] (a) synthesis of glucose (b) synthesis of proteins (c) energy availability (d) blood supply  b  In vertebrates,α-keratin (a protein) constitutes almost the entire dry weight of hair. Therefore, as the person ages, metabolism decreases, synthesis of protein decreases leading to thinning of hair. 75 Which of the following is mismatched? [CBSE AIPMT 1999] (a) Vitamin-K — Beri-beri (b) Vitamin-D — Rickets (c) Vitamin-C — Scurvy (d) Vitamin-A — Xerophthalmia  a  Beri-beri is caused by the deficiency of vitamin-B1 (thiamine). Vitamin-K is also known as antihaemorrhagic factor. The main sources of vitamin-K are green leafy vegetables such as cauliflower, cabbage, spinach, etc. It is also found in animal sources like egg yolk, liver, etc. Vitamin-K is essential for blood clotting and deficiency of it causes haemorrhage. 76 Which one of the following is a protein deficiency disease? [CBSE AIPMT 1998] (a) Eczema (b) Cirrhosis (c) Kwashiorkor (d) Night blindness  c  Kwashiorkor is a protein deficiency disease (no calorie deficiency but structural). Its common symptoms are wasting of muscles, thinning of limbs, failure of growth and brain development and diarrhoea. 77 For person suffering from high blood cholesterol, the physicians recommend [CBSE AIPMT 1996] (a) pure ‘deshi ghee’ or butter (b) vegetable oil such as groundnut oil (c) red meat with layers of fats (d) vanaspati margarine  b  A patient of high blood cholesterol is suggested to take unsaturated fats as vegetable oils. Such as ground nut oil because high intake of saturated fat causes high blood cholesterol which ultimately gets deposited in the walls of arteries causing their blockage resulting in various cardiac-disease. Ghee, butter, red meat vanaspati, they all are rich sources of saturated fats. 78 The vitamin-C or ascorbic acid prevents [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) rickets (b) pellagra (c) scurvy (d) antibody synthesis  c  Vitamin-C or ascorbic acid prevents scurvy (failure to form connective tissue). Characterised by bleeding gums, anaemia, loose teeth, painful and swollen joints, delayed healing of wounds and emaciation. 79 Calcium deficiency occurs in the absence of vitamin [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) D (b) C (c) E (d) B  a  Vitamin-D (calciferol/antirachitic factor) mainly helps in Ca/P balance in the body fluids. It increases absorption of calcium from intestine so, it is necessary for formation of healthy bones and teeth. Deficiency of vitamin-D causes increased loss of Ca2 + in urine, so, no Ca2 + gets deposited in the bones. This cause rickets in children and in pregnant woman it causes osteomalacia. 80 Which of the following pair is characterised by swollen lips, thick pigmented skin of hands and legs and irritability? [CBSE AIPMT 1993, 94, 96] (a) Thiamine — Beri-beri (b) Protein — Kwashiorkor (c) Nicotinamide — Pellagra (d) Iodine — Goitre  c  Pellagra is characterised by swollen lips, pigmented skin of hands, legs and irritability. This disease is caused by the deficiency of vitamin-B3 or niacin. This is pellagra protective vitamin and can be synthesised in the body from amino acid tryptophan. 17 Breathing and Exchange of Gases TOPIC 1 Human Respiratory System: Structure

=== Q8 [row=2347] topic=Neural Control and Coordination ===
  Q: Which one of the following organs in the human body is most affected due to shortage of oxygen?
  O1: Intestine
  O2: Skin
  O3: Kidney
  O4: Brain
  ANS: 4.0
  EXPL: The brain cells are highly specialised. They cannot regenerate and respire withoutO2 . Therefore, the shortage ofO2 B Cut end of rib C D Lung D C Heart A B leads to death of brain cells.

=== Q9 [row=2348] topic=Breathing and Exchange of Gases ===
  Q: In alveoli of the lungs, the air at the site of gas exchange, is separated from the blood by
  O1: A–trachea-long tube supported by complete cartilaginous rings for conducting inspired air
  O2: B–pleural membrane-surround ribs on both sides to provide cushion against rubbing
  O3: C–alveoli-thin walled vascular bag-like structures for exchange of gases
  O4: D–lower end of lungs-diaphragm pulls it down during inspiration
  ANS: 3.0
  EXPL: C–Alveoli are thin-walled vascular bag-like structures for exchange of gases. (a) A — Alveolar cavity (b) D — Capillary wall (c) B — Red blood cell (d) C — Arterial capillary — main site of exchange of respiratory gases — exchange of gases takes place here — transport of mainly haemoglobin — passes oxygen to tissues (a) alveolar epithelium only (b) alveolar epithelium and capillary endothelium (c) alveolar epithelium, capillary endothelium and tunica adventitia (d) alveolar epithelium, capillary endothelium, a thin layer of tunica media and tunica adventitia  b  The wall of the capillaries consists of only tunica internae which is made up of simple squamous endothelium. The wall of alveoli is also very thin, consisting of squamous epithelium. Breathing and Exchange of Gases 161 TOPIC 2 Mechanism of Breathing

=== Q14 [row=2353] topic=Breathing and Exchange of Gases ===
  Q: Residual volume (iv) 1000–1100 mL 162 1 23 4
  O1: i iv ii iii
  O2: iii i iv ii
  O3: iii ii i iv
  O4: iv iii ii i
  ANS: 2.0
  EXPL: Tidal Volume (TV) is the volume of air inspired or expired during normal breath. It is about 500–550 mL. Inspiratory Reserve Volume (IRV) is the extra amount of air that can be inspired directly after a normal inspiration. It is about 2500–3000 mL. Expiratory Reserve Volume (ERV) is the extra amount of air that can be expired forcibly after a normal expiration. It is about 1000-1100 mL. Residual Volume (RV) is the volume of air which remains still in the lung after the most forceful expiration. It is about 1100-1200 mL. Therefore, option (b) is correct.

=== Q18 [row=2357] topic=Breathing and Exchange of Gases ===
  Q: Haemoglobin 4. RBC Reduction in pH of blood, i.e. increase in acidity favours the dissociation of oxyhaemoglobin thereby giving upmore O2 . When this phenomenon occurs due to increase in CO2 concentration then it is called Bohr effect. 23 The partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli of the lungs is
  O1: equal to that in the blood
  O2: more than that in the blood
  O3: less than that in the blood
  O4: less than that of carbon dioxide
  ANS: 2.0
  EXPL: The partial pressure of oxygen(O) 2 p in temperature (c) High pO2, high pCO2, less H +, higher temperature (d) Low pO2, low pCO2, more H +, higher temperature  a  The favourable conditions for the formation of oxyhaemoglobin is high pO2 , lesser H + concentration and lower temperature found in alveoli, whereas low pO2 , high H + concentration and high temperature are favourable for dissociation of oxygen from the oxyhaemoglobin found in tissues. 19 The partial pressures (in mm Hg) of oxygen (O2 ) and carbon dioxide (CO2 ) at alveoli (the site of diffusion) are [NEET 2021] (a) pO2 = 104 and pCO2 = 40 (b) pO2 = 40 and pCO2 = 45 Option (b) is correct match, which is as follows. Pneumotaxic centre is present in the pons region of the brain. O2 dissociation curve is useful in studying the effect of factors like pCO2 , H+ concentration, etc., on binding ofO2 with haemoglobin. Carbonic anhydrase is an enzyme present on the surface of RBC. Primary site of exchange of gases is the alveoli of the lungs. 21 Identify the wrong statement with reference to transport of oxygen. [NEET (Sep.) 2020] (a) Partial pressure ofCO2 can interfere withO2 binding with haemoglobin (b) HigherH+ concentration in alveoli favours the formation of oxyhaemoglobin (c) Low pCO2 in alveoli favours the formation of oxyhaemoglobin alveoli of lungs is 104 mm Hg, which is more than that of blood in the blood capillaries of lung alveoli (40 mm Hg). This difference allows passive diffusion ofO2 from air filled in the lungs to the blood vessels of lung alveoli. 24 Approximately seventy percent of carbon dioxide absorbed by the blood will be transported to the lungs [CBSE AIPMT 2014] (a) as bicarbonate ions (b) in the form of dissolved gas molecules (c) by binding to RBC (d) as carbaminohaemoglobin  a  The largest fraction of carbon dioxide, i.e. about 70% is converted to bicarbonates (HCO ) 3− and transported in the plasma. Carbonic +   H CO 2 3 ACnhydrase (c) pO2 = 95 and pCO2 = 40 (d) pO2 = 159 and pCO2= 0.3  a  (d) Binding of oxygen with haemoglobin is mainly related to partial pressure of O2 CO H O 2 2 Anhydrase HCO H 3− + + arbonic Partial pressures of oxygen( in mm Hg) and carbon dioxide at alveoli are pO2 = 104and pCO2 = 40.  b  Statement in option (b) is incorrect with reference to transport of oxygen. It can be corrected as About −23%of CO2 is carried by + haemoglobin as carbaminohaemoglobin CO Hb (haemoglobin) HbCO 2 3 Respir atory gas Atmos pheric air Alveoli Blood (deoxy genated) Blood (oxyge nated) Tissue In alveoli high pO2 , low pCO2 , low H + concentration and lower temperature are the factors that favour the formation Carbo amino haemoglobin 25 People who have migrated from the planes to an area adjoining O2 159 104 40 95 40 CO2 0.3 40 45 40 45 20 Match the following columns and select the correct option from the codes given below. [NEET (Oct.) 2020] of oxyhaemoglobin. 22 Reduction in pH of blood will [NEET 2016, Phase I] (a) reduce the blood supply to the brain (b) decrease the affinity of haemoglobin with oxygen (c) release bicarbonate ions by the liver (d) reduce the rate of heartbeat Rohtang Pass about six months back [CBSE AIPMT 2012] (a) have more RBCs and their haemoglobin has a lower binding affinity toO2 (b) are not physically fit to play games like football 164 (c) suffer from altitude sickness with symptoms like nausea, fatigue, etc. (d) have the usual RBC count but their haemoglobin has very high binding affinity toO2  a  As a person moves up a hill the pO2 and total atmospheric pressure decreases. Decrease in pO2 due to the increasing altitude, stimulates the Juxtaglomerular cells of kidney to secrete erythropoietin hormone which increases the number of RBCs (polycythemia) to compensate the supply ofO2 . At higher altitude, haemoglobin has lower binding affinity toO2 because the primary factor responsible for binding is pO2 which decreases at higher altitude. 26 Which two of the following changes (1- )4 usually tend to occur in the plain dwellers when they move to high altitudes (3,500 m or more)? [CBSE AIPMT 2010]

=== Q24 [row=2363] topic=Body Fluids and Circulation ===
  Q: Albumin (iii) Defence mechanism 1 23
  O1: (i) (iii) (ii)
  O2: (i) (ii) (iii)
  O3: (iii) (ii) (i)
  O4: (ii) (iii) (i)
  ANS: 4.0
  EXPL: Fibrinogen is a soluble plasma protein that is stimulated by thrombin and gets converted into insoluble form fibrin. The latter helps in the formation of blood clot to seal the wound and stop bleeding. 168 Globulins are simple proteins that form a large fraction of blood serum proteins involved in defence mechanism. There are four main types of globulins that are manufactured in liver, namely alpha-1, alpha-2, beta and gamma. Albumin is a plasma protein that is manufactured by the liver. It helps in maintaining osmotic pressure which prevents the fluid-leakage out into the tissues from the bloodstream.

=== Q34 [row=2373] topic=Body Fluids and Circulation ===
  Q: What is correct regarding leucocytes?
  O1: These can squeeze out through (can cross) the capillary walls
  O2: These are enucleate
  O3: Sudden fall in their number indicates cancer
  O4: These are produced in thymus
  ANS: 1.0
  EXPL: Most of the T and B-lymphocytes (types of leukocytes) continuously circulate between the blood and lymph. These leave the blood stream, squeezing out between specialised endothelial cuts found in certain small vessels and enter various tissues including all the lymph nodes. After percolating through a tissue, these accumulate in small lymphatic vessels which connect to a series of lymph nodes, from where they ultimately enter the main lymphatic vessel (thoracic duct) which carries them back into the blood.

=== Q46 [row=2385] topic=Body Fluids and Circulation ===
  Q: RBCs do not occur in
  O1: frog
  O2: cow
  O3: camel
  O4: cockroach system, in which hepatic portal vein carries food laiden blood from Blood groups Antigen on RBC Antibodies in serum
  ANS: 4.0
  EXPL: alimentary canal and associated glands before finally returning to heart. 27 Antigens are present [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) inside the nucleus (b) on cell surface (c) inside the cytoplasm (d) on nuclear membrane  b  Antigens (Ag) are foreign particles present on the surface of cell and when introduced in the blood they initiate a specific immune response against themselves. A A anti-b B B anti-a AB A and B – O – anti-a and anti-b Hence, blood group AB has no antibodies in serum but both antigens A and B. 31 A person with blood group A requires blood. The blood group which can be given is [CBSE AIPMT 1989] (a) A and B (b) A and AB (c) A and O (d) A, B, AB and O RBCs or red blood corpuscles are meant for the transportation of respiratory gases in the blood and these are present in all vertebrates. In cockroach haemolymph is present which serves for the transportation of nutrients, maintains hydrostatic pressure and acts as a reservoir of water.

=== Q47 [row=2386] topic=Excretory Products and their Elimination ===
  Q: Breakdown product of haemoglobin is
  O1: bilirubin
  O2: iron
  O3: biliverdin
  O4: calcium Body Fluids and Circulation 171
  ANS: 1.0
  EXPL: Haemoglobin of erythrocytes split off into heme and globin. The core of iron in heme is salvaged, bound to protein as hemosiderin and stored for reuse. The remaining of the heme group is degraded to bilirubin a yellow pigment that is released into the blood. Bilirubin is picked up by liver cells which in turn secrete it into the intestine where it is metabolised to urobilinogen.

=== Q48 [row=2387] topic=Body Fluids and Circulation ===
  Q: One of the factors required for the maturation of erythrocytes is
  O1: vitamin-D
  O2: vitamin-A
  O3: vitamin-B12
  O4: vitamin-C
  ANS: 3.0
  EXPL: Vitamin-B12 (cobalamin) promotes DNA synthesis, maturation of erythrocytes and myelin formation. Vitamin-D (calciferol), It is necessary for the formation of healthy bones and teeth. Vitamin-A (retinol), It is necessary for proper body growth and night vision. Vitamin-C (ascorbic acid), It helps in wound healing, blood formation and absorption of iron.