     1→
     2→Q1 | R2001 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
     3→  Q: S-phase
     4→  A(!!UNUSUAL:In the cycle of cell division,interphase is the longest phase consisting of G , S, 1 G2-phases. In this phase cell prepares itself for cell division. In S or synthetic phase DNA duplication (synthesis) takes place.!!): G1-phase
     5→  B: G2 -phase
     6→  C: M-phase
     7→  D: 1.0
     8→  Correct stored: In the cycle of cell division,interphase is the longest phase consisting of G , S, 1 G2-phases. In this phase cell prepares itself for cell division. In S or synthetic phase DNA duplication (synthesis) takes place. -> !!UNUSUAL:In the cycle of cell division,interphase is the longest phase consisting of G , S, 1 G2-phases. In this phase cell prepares itself for cell division. In S or synthetic phase DNA duplication (synthesis) takes place.!!
     9→
    10→Q2 | R2002 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    11→  Q: G and G 0 1
    12→  A(!!UNUSUAL:During the S or synthetic phase, the DNA content doubles, i.e., from 2C to 4C for all diploid cells. The G2 phase follows the S-phase and is called second growth phase or pre mitotic gap phase. In G2 phase the synthesis of DNA stops therefore, the DNA level remains 4C if initial was 2C. However, the formation of RNA and protein continue as they are required for the multiplication of cell organelles, spindle formation and cell growth. This amount becomes half (i.e.) 2C only during anaphase (in mitosis) when chromosomes separate.!!): G1 and S
    13→  B: OnlyG2
    14→  C: G2 and M
    15→  D: 4.0
    16→  Correct stored: During the S or synthetic phase, the DNA content doubles, i.e., from 2C to 4C for all diploid cells. The G2 phase follows the S-phase and is called second growth phase or pre mitotic gap phase. In G2 phase the synthesis of DNA stops therefore, the DNA level remains 4C if initial was 2C. However, the formation of RNA and protein continue as they are required for the multiplication of cell organelles, spindle formation and cell growth. This amount becomes half (i.e.) 2C only during anaphase (in mitosis) when chromosomes separate. -> !!UNUSUAL:During the S or synthetic phase, the DNA content doubles, i.e., from 2C to 4C for all diploid cells. The G2 phase follows the S-phase and is called second growth phase or pre mitotic gap phase. In G2 phase the synthesis of DNA stops therefore, the DNA level remains 4C if initial was 2C. However, the formation of RNA and protein continue as they are required for the multiplication of cell organelles, spindle formation and cell growth. This amount becomes half (i.e.) 2C only during anaphase (in mitosis) when chromosomes separate.!!
    17→
    18→Q3 | R2003 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    19→  Q: amount of DNA doubles in each cell
    20→  A(!!UNUSUAL:S-phase is the synthesis phase in which the cell synthesise a replica of its genome, i.e. DNA replication occurs by DNA polymerase. DNA replication along with the synthesis of histone proteins results in the duplication of chromosomal material, i.e., amount of DNA doubles in each cell. Amount of DNA remains unchanged during G1-phase or post mitotic gap and/or G2 -phase or pre mitotic phase.!!): amount of DNA remains same in each cell
    21→  B: chromosome number is increased
    22→  C: amount of DNA is reduced to half in each cell
    23→  D: 1.0
    24→  Correct stored: S-phase is the synthesis phase in which the cell synthesise a replica of its genome, i.e. DNA replication occurs by DNA polymerase. DNA replication along with the synthesis of histone proteins results in the duplication of chromosomal material, i.e., amount of DNA doubles in each cell. Amount of DNA remains unchanged during G1-phase or post mitotic gap and/or G2 -phase or pre mitotic phase. -> !!UNUSUAL:S-phase is the synthesis phase in which the cell synthesise a replica of its genome, i.e. DNA replication occurs by DNA polymerase. DNA replication along with the synthesis of histone proteins results in the duplication of chromosomal material, i.e., amount of DNA doubles in each cell. Amount of DNA remains unchanged during G1-phase or post mitotic gap and/or G2 -phase or pre mitotic phase.!!
    25→
    26→Q4 | R2004 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    27→  Q: B-metaphase
    28→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Cell cycle completes in two steps, i.e. interphase and M-phase. Interphase is completed in three successive stages G1-phase (post mitotic phase), S-phase (synthetic phase) and G2 -phase (premitotic or post synthetic phase). In the given figure, D is representing the S-phase (synthetic phase) of cell cycle.!!): C-karyokinesis
    29→  B: D-synthetic phase
    30→  C: A-cytokinesis
    31→  D: 3.0
    32→  Correct stored: Cell cycle completes in two steps, i.e. interphase and M-phase. Interphase is completed in three successive stages G1-phase (post mitotic phase), S-phase (synthetic phase) and G2 -phase (premitotic or post synthetic phase). In the given figure, D is representing the S-phase (synthetic phase) of cell cycle. -> !!UNUSUAL:Cell cycle completes in two steps, i.e. interphase and M-phase. Interphase is completed in three successive stages G1-phase (post mitotic phase), S-phase (synthetic phase) and G2 -phase (premitotic or post synthetic phase). In the given figure, D is representing the S-phase (synthetic phase) of cell cycle.!!
    33→
    34→Q5 | R2005 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    35→  Q: DuringG2-stage of prophase
    36→  A(!!UNUSUAL:During S-phase of cell cycle synthesis of histone proteins takes place because at this stage the amount of DNA per cell get double to that of somatic number. Histone proteins are basic proteins and are used in packing of eukaryotic (absent in prokaryotes) DNA. DNA and histones together comprise chromatin, forming bulk of the eukaryotic chromosomes. Histones are of five major kindsH1, H2A, H2B, H3 andH4. H1 histones link neighbouring nucleosomes.!!): During S-phase
    37→  B: During entire prophase
    38→  C: During telophase
    39→  D: 2.0
    40→  Correct stored: During S-phase of cell cycle synthesis of histone proteins takes place because at this stage the amount of DNA per cell get double to that of somatic number. Histone proteins are basic proteins and are used in packing of eukaryotic (absent in prokaryotes) DNA. DNA and histones together comprise chromatin, forming bulk of the eukaryotic chromosomes. Histones are of five major kindsH1, H2A, H2B, H3 andH4. H1 histones link neighbouring nucleosomes. -> !!UNUSUAL:During S-phase of cell cycle synthesis of histone proteins takes place because at this stage the amount of DNA per cell get double to that of somatic number. Histone proteins are basic proteins and are used in packing of eukaryotic (absent in prokaryotes) DNA. DNA and histones together comprise chromatin, forming bulk of the eukaryotic chromosomes. Histones are of five major kindsH1, H2A, H2B, H3 andH4. H1 histones link neighbouring nucleosomes.!!
    41→
    42→Q6 | R2006 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    43→  Q: inG1-phase DNA content is double the amount of DNA present in the original cell Cell Cycle and Cell Division 109
    44→  A(!!UNUSUAL:DNA replication occurs during S-phase of the mitotic cycle where it gets doubled as compared to that in the original cell.!!): DNA replication takes place in S-phase
    45→  B: a short interphase is followed by a long mitotic phase
    46→  C: G2-phase follows mitotic phase
    47→  D: 2.0
    48→  Correct stored: DNA replication occurs during S-phase of the mitotic cycle where it gets doubled as compared to that in the original cell. -> !!UNUSUAL:DNA replication occurs during S-phase of the mitotic cycle where it gets doubled as compared to that in the original cell.!!
    49→
    50→Q7 | R2007 | Biology | Cell: The Unit of Life
    51→  Q: Chromatid
    52→  A(!!UNUSUAL:A chromosome has one centromere, may have many chromomeres, two chromatids; but four telomeres (two each at the opposite ends of each chromatid).!!): Chromosome
    53→  B: Centromere
    54→  C: Telomere
    55→  D: 4.0
    56→  Correct stored: A chromosome has one centromere, may have many chromomeres, two chromatids; but four telomeres (two each at the opposite ends of each chromatid). -> !!UNUSUAL:A chromosome has one centromere, may have many chromomeres, two chromatids; but four telomeres (two each at the opposite ends of each chromatid).!!
    57→
    58→Q8 | R2008 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    59→  Q: S,G ,G ,M 1 2
    60→  A(!!UNUSUAL:In a mitotic cycle, the correct sequence of phases is G1, S, G2 , M. The first three phases, i.e. G1, S, G2 occurring during interphase whereas the M-phase is the period of actual cell division. The major event occurring in each phase is tabulated below Phases Activities Codes A BC D (a) 2 3 4 1 (b) 3 4 1 2 (c) 4 1 2 3 (d) 1 2 3 4  d!!): G ,S,G ,M 1 2
    61→  B: M, G , G , S 1 2
    62→  C: G , G , S, M 1 2
    63→  D: 2.0
    64→  Correct stored: In a mitotic cycle, the correct sequence of phases is G1, S, G2 , M. The first three phases, i.e. G1, S, G2 occurring during interphase whereas the M-phase is the period of actual cell division. The major event occurring in each phase is tabulated below Phases Activities Codes A BC D (a) 2 3 4 1 (b) 3 4 1 2 (c) 4 1 2 3 (d) 1 2 3 4  d -> !!UNUSUAL:In a mitotic cycle, the correct sequence of phases is G1, S, G2 , M. The first three phases, i.e. G1, S, G2 occurring during interphase whereas the M-phase is the period of actual cell division. The major event occurring in each phase is tabulated below Phases Activities Codes A BC D (a) 2 3 4 1 (b) 3 4 1 2 (c) 4 1 2 3 (d) 1 2 3 4  d!!
    65→
    66→Q9 | R2009 | Biology | Biological Classification
    67→  Q: Agaricus
    68→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Agaricus Meiospores are produced exogenously after karyogamy and meiosis. It belongs to Basidiomycetes. Alternaria belongs to the Deuteromycetes class of fungi. The fungi of this class lack sexual reproduction. Therefore, sexual spores are not formed. Neurospora and Saccharomyces belong to Ascomycetes class of fungi. They produce ascopores as meiospores. Their ascospores are produced endogenously. meristem the nuclear membrane appears in [CBSE AIPMT 1997] (a) metaphase (b) anaphase (c) telophase (d) cytokinesis  c  During telophase, nuclear envelope initially reforms around each chromosome individually which later on fuse to form complete nuclear envelope. G1-phase Cell becomes metabolically active, enzymes and proteins required for replication are synthesised. S-phase Synthesis or replication of DNA occurs so that amount of DNA per cell gets doubled. G2 -phase Proteins required for mitosis are synthesised while the growth of cell continues. M-phase Cell divides to form daughter Ascospores Ascus Basidiospores Sterigma Basidium Metaphase Chromosomes are arranged on equatorial plate. Anaphase Chromosomes split longitudinally. Chromatids migrate towards opposite poles. Cytokinesis Division of cytoplasm. TOPIC 2 Mitosis 17 The fruit fly has 8 chromosomes (2n) in each cell. During interphase of mitosis, if the number of chromosomes at G1-phase is 8, what would be the number of chromosomes after S-phase ? cells. 19 Match the following (Columns) events that occur in their respective phases of cell cycle and select the correct option from the codes given below. [NEET (Oct.) 2020] Column I Column II A. G1-phase 1. Cell grows and organelle duplication B. S phase 2. DNA replication and chromosome duplication C. G2 -phase 3. Cytoplasmic growth Ascospores Basidiospores!!): Alternaria
    69→  B: Neurospora
    70→  C: Saccharomyces
    71→  D: 1.0
    72→  Correct stored: Agaricus Meiospores are produced exogenously after karyogamy and meiosis. It belongs to Basidiomycetes. Alternaria belongs to the Deuteromycetes class of fungi. The fungi of this class lack sexual reproduction. Therefore, sexual spores are not formed. Neurospora and Saccharomyces belong to Ascomycetes class of fungi. They produce ascopores as meiospores. Their ascospores are produced endogenously. meristem the nuclear membrane appears in [CBSE AIPMT 1997] (a) metaphase (b) anaphase (c) telophase (d) cytokinesis  c  During telophase, nuclear envelope initially reforms around each chromosome individually which later on fuse to form complete nuclear envelope. G1-phase Cell becomes metabolically active, enzymes and proteins required for replication are synthesised. S-phase Synthesis or replication of DNA occurs so that amount of DNA per cell gets doubled. G2 -phase Proteins required for mitosis are synthesised while the growth of cell continues. M-phase Cell divides to form daughter Ascospores Ascus Basidiospores Sterigma Basidium Metaphase Chromosomes are arranged on equatorial plate. Anaphase Chromosomes split longitudinally. Chromatids migrate towards opposite poles. Cytokinesis Division of cytoplasm. TOPIC 2 Mitosis 17 The fruit fly has 8 chromosomes (2n) in each cell. During interphase of mitosis, if the number of chromosomes at G1-phase is 8, what would be the number of chromosomes after S-phase ? cells. 19 Match the following (Columns) events that occur in their respective phases of cell cycle and select the correct option from the codes given below. [NEET (Oct.) 2020] Column I Column II A. G1-phase 1. Cell grows and organelle duplication B. S phase 2. DNA replication and chromosome duplication C. G2 -phase 3. Cytoplasmic growth Ascospores Basidiospores -> !!UNUSUAL:Agaricus Meiospores are produced exogenously after karyogamy and meiosis. It belongs to Basidiomycetes. Alternaria belongs to the Deuteromycetes class of fungi. The fungi of this class lack sexual reproduction. Therefore, sexual spores are not formed. Neurospora and Saccharomyces belong to Ascomycetes class of fungi. They produce ascopores as meiospores. Their ascospores are produced endogenously. meristem the nuclear membrane appears in [CBSE AIPMT 1997] (a) metaphase (b) anaphase (c) telophase (d) cytokinesis  c  During telophase, nuclear envelope initially reforms around each chromosome individually which later on fuse to form complete nuclear envelope. G1-phase Cell becomes metabolically active, enzymes and proteins required for replication are synthesised. S-phase Synthesis or replication of DNA occurs so that amount of DNA per cell gets doubled. G2 -phase Proteins required for mitosis are synthesised while the growth of cell continues. M-phase Cell divides to form daughter Ascospores Ascus Basidiospores Sterigma Basidium Metaphase Chromosomes are arranged on equatorial plate. Anaphase Chromosomes split longitudinally. Chromatids migrate towards opposite poles. Cytokinesis Division of cytoplasm. TOPIC 2 Mitosis 17 The fruit fly has 8 chromosomes (2n) in each cell. During interphase of mitosis, if the number of chromosomes at G1-phase is 8, what would be the number of chromosomes after S-phase ? cells. 19 Match the following (Columns) events that occur in their respective phases of cell cycle and select the correct option from the codes given below. [NEET (Oct.) 2020] Column I Column II A. G1-phase 1. Cell grows and organelle duplication B. S phase 2. DNA replication and chromosome duplication C. G2 -phase 3. Cytoplasmic growth Ascospores Basidiospores!!
    73→
    74→Q10 | R2010 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    75→  Q: Chromosomes will not condense
    76→  A(!!UNUSUAL:If anaphase promoting complex is (a) 8 (b) 16 [NEET 2021] (c) 4 (d) 32 D. Metaphase in M-phase 4. Alignment of chromosomes defective in a human cell, the chromosomes will not segregate during anaphase of mitosis. APC triggers the 110 transition from metaphase to anaphase by tagging specific proteins for degradation. Concept Enhancer Anaphase stage of mitosis is characterised by two events (a) Splitting of centromeres and segregation of chromosomes. (b) Movement of chromatids towards the opposite poles.!!): Chromosomes will be fragmented
    77→  B: Chromosomes will not segregate
    78→  C: Recombination of chromosome arms will occur
    79→  D: 3.0
    80→  Correct stored: If anaphase promoting complex is (a) 8 (b) 16 [NEET 2021] (c) 4 (d) 32 D. Metaphase in M-phase 4. Alignment of chromosomes defective in a human cell, the chromosomes will not segregate during anaphase of mitosis. APC triggers the 110 transition from metaphase to anaphase by tagging specific proteins for degradation. Concept Enhancer Anaphase stage of mitosis is characterised by two events (a) Splitting of centromeres and segregation of chromosomes. (b) Movement of chromatids towards the opposite poles. -> !!UNUSUAL:If anaphase promoting complex is (a) 8 (b) 16 [NEET 2021] (c) 4 (d) 32 D. Metaphase in M-phase 4. Alignment of chromosomes defective in a human cell, the chromosomes will not segregate during anaphase of mitosis. APC triggers the 110 transition from metaphase to anaphase by tagging specific proteins for degradation. Concept Enhancer Anaphase stage of mitosis is characterised by two events (a) Splitting of centromeres and segregation of chromosomes. (b) Movement of chromatids towards the opposite poles.!!
    81→
    82→Q11 | R2011 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    83→  Q: Condensation→ nuclear membrane disassembly→ crossing over → segregation→ telophase
    84→  A(!!UNUSUAL:During mitosis following events occurs as follows Condensation of chromosomal material, which takes place at an early prophase stage. During late prophase nuclear membrane disintegrates. Then chromosomes get arranged at equator in the metaphase stage. After that splitting of centromere and segregation of chromosomes occur in the anaphase stage. In telophase stage chromosomes move to opposite poles of the cell. It is last stage of mitosis.!!): Condensation→ nuclear membrane disassembly→ arrangement at equator→ centromere division→ segregation→ telophase
    85→  B: Condensation→ crossing over→ nuclear membrane disassembly→ segregation→ telophase
    86→  C: Condensation→ arrangement at equator→ centromere division→ segregation→ telophase
    87→  D: 2.0
    88→  Correct stored: During mitosis following events occurs as follows Condensation of chromosomal material, which takes place at an early prophase stage. During late prophase nuclear membrane disintegrates. Then chromosomes get arranged at equator in the metaphase stage. After that splitting of centromere and segregation of chromosomes occur in the anaphase stage. In telophase stage chromosomes move to opposite poles of the cell. It is last stage of mitosis. -> !!UNUSUAL:During mitosis following events occurs as follows Condensation of chromosomal material, which takes place at an early prophase stage. During late prophase nuclear membrane disintegrates. Then chromosomes get arranged at equator in the metaphase stage. After that splitting of centromere and segregation of chromosomes occur in the anaphase stage. In telophase stage chromosomes move to opposite poles of the cell. It is last stage of mitosis.!!
    89→
    90→Q12 | R2012 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    91→  Q: Disappearance of nucleolus
    92→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Synapsis is pairing of homologous chromosomes. It occurs during zygotene stage of meiosis. The homologous chromosomes come closer leading to cross over in the next stage called pachytene. These are not observed during mitosis.!!): Chromosome movement
    93→  B: Synapsis
    94→  C: Spindle fibres
    95→  D: 3.0
    96→  Correct stored: Synapsis is pairing of homologous chromosomes. It occurs during zygotene stage of meiosis. The homologous chromosomes come closer leading to cross over in the next stage called pachytene. These are not observed during mitosis. -> !!UNUSUAL:Synapsis is pairing of homologous chromosomes. It occurs during zygotene stage of meiosis. The homologous chromosomes come closer leading to cross over in the next stage called pachytene. These are not observed during mitosis.!!
    97→
    98→Q13 | R2013 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
    99→  Q: kinetochore of the chromosome
   100→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Spindle fibres attach to kinetochores of chromosomes during cell division. They help the chromosomes/chromatids to get separated to the two daughter cells, towards opposite poles.!!): centromere of the chromosome
   101→  B: kinetosome of the chromosome
   102→  C: telomere of the chromosome
   103→  D: 1.0
   104→  Correct stored: Spindle fibres attach to kinetochores of chromosomes during cell division. They help the chromosomes/chromatids to get separated to the two daughter cells, towards opposite poles. -> !!UNUSUAL:Spindle fibres attach to kinetochores of chromosomes during cell division. They help the chromosomes/chromatids to get separated to the two daughter cells, towards opposite poles.!!
   105→
   106→Q14 | R2014 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   107→  Q: equatorial plate
   108→  A(!!UNUSUAL:The process of pairing of homologous chromosomes is called synapsis. Each pair of synapsed homologous chromosome called bivalent.!!): kinetochore
   109→  B: bivalent
   110→  C: axoneme
   111→  D: 3.0
   112→  Correct stored: The process of pairing of homologous chromosomes is called synapsis. Each pair of synapsed homologous chromosome called bivalent. -> !!UNUSUAL:The process of pairing of homologous chromosomes is called synapsis. Each pair of synapsed homologous chromosome called bivalent.!!
   113→
   114→Q15 | R2015 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   115→  Q: Telophase — Nuclear envelope reforms, Golgi complex reforms
   116→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Telophase is reverse of prophase. The chromosome that have reached their respective poles decondense, i.e., nuclear envelop reforms, Golgi complex reforms, etc. In late anaphase centromeres split and chromatid separate and chromatid move to opposite poles. Cytokinesis is process in which cell itself is divided two daughter cells.!!): Late anaphase— Chromosomes move away from equatorial plate, Golgi complex not present
   117→  B: Cytokinesis — Cell plate formed, mitochondria distributed between two daughter cells
   118→  C: Telophase — Endoplasmic reticulum and nucleolus not reformed yet
   119→  D: 1.0
   120→  Correct stored: Telophase is reverse of prophase. The chromosome that have reached their respective poles decondense, i.e., nuclear envelop reforms, Golgi complex reforms, etc. In late anaphase centromeres split and chromatid separate and chromatid move to opposite poles. Cytokinesis is process in which cell itself is divided two daughter cells. -> !!UNUSUAL:Telophase is reverse of prophase. The chromosome that have reached their respective poles decondense, i.e., nuclear envelop reforms, Golgi complex reforms, etc. In late anaphase centromeres split and chromatid separate and chromatid move to opposite poles. Cytokinesis is process in which cell itself is divided two daughter cells.!!
   121→
   122→Q16 | R2016 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   123→  Q: Chromatids start moving towards opposite poles in telophase
   124→  A(!!UNUSUAL:In metaphase of mitosis, spindle fibres attach to kinetochore of chromosomes. Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator and get aligned along metaphasic plate through spindle fibres to both pole.!!): Golgi complex and endoplasmic reticulum are still visible at the end of prophase
   125→  B: Chromosomes move to the spindle equator and get aligned along equatorial plate in metaphase
   126→  C: Chromatids separate but remains in the centre of the cell in anaphase
   127→  D: 3.0
   128→  Correct stored: In metaphase of mitosis, spindle fibres attach to kinetochore of chromosomes. Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator and get aligned along metaphasic plate through spindle fibres to both pole. -> !!UNUSUAL:In metaphase of mitosis, spindle fibres attach to kinetochore of chromosomes. Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator and get aligned along metaphasic plate through spindle fibres to both pole.!!
   129→
   130→Q17 | R2017 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   131→  Q: late prophase
   132→  A(!!UNUSUAL:In mitosis, prophase is the longest phase of karyokinesis. In early prophase, nuclear membranes, nucleolus start disintegrating. Cells cytoskeleton, Golgi complex, ER, etc. disappear.!!): early metaphase
   133→  B: late metaphase
   134→  C: early prophase
   135→  D: 4.0
   136→  Correct stored: In mitosis, prophase is the longest phase of karyokinesis. In early prophase, nuclear membranes, nucleolus start disintegrating. Cells cytoskeleton, Golgi complex, ER, etc. disappear. -> !!UNUSUAL:In mitosis, prophase is the longest phase of karyokinesis. In early prophase, nuclear membranes, nucleolus start disintegrating. Cells cytoskeleton, Golgi complex, ER, etc. disappear.!!
   137→
   138→Q18 | R2018 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   139→  Q: Metaphase – Telophase
   140→  A(!!UNUSUAL:In the given figures A. Late anaphase is characterised by following events (i) Centromeres split and chromatids separate. (ii) Chromatids move to opposite poles. B. Prophase is characterised by centriole separation.!!): Telophase – Metaphase
   141→  B: Late anaphase – Prophase
   142→  C: Prophase – Anaphase
   143→  D: 3.0
   144→  Correct stored: In the given figures A. Late anaphase is characterised by following events (i) Centromeres split and chromatids separate. (ii) Chromatids move to opposite poles. B. Prophase is characterised by centriole separation. -> !!UNUSUAL:In the given figures A. Late anaphase is characterised by following events (i) Centromeres split and chromatids separate. (ii) Chromatids move to opposite poles. B. Prophase is characterised by centriole separation.!!
   145→
   146→Q19 | R2019 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   147→  Q: movement of chromosomes towards poles
   148→  A(!!UNUSUAL:ription  a  The arms of chromosome are known as chromatids. These arms are held together at a point called the centromere (or primary constriction). Centromere occurs any where along the length of chromosome. During cell division spindle fibres are attached to centromere and help in the movement of chromosomes towards the poles.!!): cytoplasmic cleavage
   149→  B: crossing over
   150→  C: tr
   151→  D: 3.0
   152→  Correct stored: ription  a  The arms of chromosome are known as chromatids. These arms are held together at a point called the centromere (or primary constriction). Centromere occurs any where along the length of chromosome. During cell division spindle fibres are attached to centromere and help in the movement of chromosomes towards the poles. -> !!UNUSUAL:ription  a  The arms of chromosome are known as chromatids. These arms are held together at a point called the centromere (or primary constriction). Centromere occurs any where along the length of chromosome. During cell division spindle fibres are attached to centromere and help in the movement of chromosomes towards the poles.!!
   153→
   154→Q20 | R2020 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   155→  Q: Metaphase
   156→  A(!!UNUSUAL:At metaphase, the chromosomes are clearly visible as composed of two closely associated halves (chromatids) and the chromosomes have undergone maximum contraction so, these can be counted conveniently. In metaphase chromosome align in the equator of the cell before being separated into each of the two daughter cells.!!): Telophase
   157→  B: Anaphase
   158→  C: Prophase
   159→  D: 1.0
   160→  Correct stored: At metaphase, the chromosomes are clearly visible as composed of two closely associated halves (chromatids) and the chromosomes have undergone maximum contraction so, these can be counted conveniently. In metaphase chromosome align in the equator of the cell before being separated into each of the two daughter cells. -> !!UNUSUAL:At metaphase, the chromosomes are clearly visible as composed of two closely associated halves (chromatids) and the chromosomes have undergone maximum contraction so, these can be counted conveniently. In metaphase chromosome align in the equator of the cell before being separated into each of the two daughter cells.!!
   161→
   162→Q21 | R2021 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   163→  Q: Actin
   164→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Spindles formed during mitosis and meiosis are nothing but microtubule complex. Microtubules are made up of small units of tubulin which has amino acid composition similar to actin.!!): Myosin
   165→  B: Actomyosin
   166→  C: Myoglobin
   167→  D: 1.0
   168→  Correct stored: Spindles formed during mitosis and meiosis are nothing but microtubule complex. Microtubules are made up of small units of tubulin which has amino acid composition similar to actin. -> !!UNUSUAL:Spindles formed during mitosis and meiosis are nothing but microtubule complex. Microtubules are made up of small units of tubulin which has amino acid composition similar to actin.!!
   169→
   170→Q22 | R2022 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   171→  Q: anther
   172→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Root tips have active meristematic zone where cells divide mitotically leading to increase in the length of the roots. This is the best site for the study of mitosis, e.g. onion root tips.!!): root tip
   173→  B: leaf tip
   174→  C: ovary
   175→  D: 2.0
   176→  Correct stored: Root tips have active meristematic zone where cells divide mitotically leading to increase in the length of the roots. This is the best site for the study of mitosis, e.g. onion root tips. -> !!UNUSUAL:Root tips have active meristematic zone where cells divide mitotically leading to increase in the length of the roots. This is the best site for the study of mitosis, e.g. onion root tips.!!
   177→
   178→Q23 | R2023 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   179→  Q: Chromocentre
   180→  A(!!UNUSUAL:During late prophase, specialised structures called kinetochores develop on either surface of the centromere. Chromosomal fibres get attached to kinetochore. Chromomeres are beaded structures on the chromosomes which are found particularly at the prophase-I (particularly at leptotene) of meiosis-I. Chromocentre is developed due to the fusion of centromeric regions of all the chromosomes of a cell. Centrosome is found in animal cells (absent in higher plant cells). It is found near the nucleus. Each centrosome is made up of two centrioles and each centriole is a cylindrical structure with a diameter of 1500-1800 Å and is made up of nine fibrils.!!): kinetochore
   181→  B: centriole
   182→  C: chromomere
   183→  D: 2.0
   184→  Correct stored: During late prophase, specialised structures called kinetochores develop on either surface of the centromere. Chromosomal fibres get attached to kinetochore. Chromomeres are beaded structures on the chromosomes which are found particularly at the prophase-I (particularly at leptotene) of meiosis-I. Chromocentre is developed due to the fusion of centromeric regions of all the chromosomes of a cell. Centrosome is found in animal cells (absent in higher plant cells). It is found near the nucleus. Each centrosome is made up of two centrioles and each centriole is a cylindrical structure with a diameter of 1500-1800 Å and is made up of nine fibrils. -> !!UNUSUAL:During late prophase, specialised structures called kinetochores develop on either surface of the centromere. Chromosomal fibres get attached to kinetochore. Chromomeres are beaded structures on the chromosomes which are found particularly at the prophase-I (particularly at leptotene) of meiosis-I. Chromocentre is developed due to the fusion of centromeric regions of all the chromosomes of a cell. Centrosome is found in animal cells (absent in higher plant cells). It is found near the nucleus. Each centrosome is made up of two centrioles and each centriole is a cylindrical structure with a diameter of 1500-1800 Å and is made up of nine fibrils.!!
   185→
   186→Q24 | R2024 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   187→  Q: 7.0
   188→  A(!!UNUSUAL:A single mitotic division results in the production of two cells from single cell. O D1 O D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 OOO O O O O!!): 14.0
   189→  B: 28.0
   190→  C: 64.0
   191→  D: 1.0
   192→  Correct stored: A single mitotic division results in the production of two cells from single cell. O D1 O D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 OOO O O O O -> !!UNUSUAL:A single mitotic division results in the production of two cells from single cell. O D1 O D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 D7 D8 OOO O O O O!!
   193→
   194→Q25 | R2025 | Biology | Cell Cycle and Cell Division
   195→  Q: Cell plate
   196→  A(!!UNUSUAL:Centrosome is found in animals, Euglena, Nitella, some fungi and members of dinoflagellate. It is found near the nucleus. Centriole is not common to mitotic cell of higher plants. Main function of centrosome is at the time of cell division when the two centrioles separate and move on two poles. Aster and spindle are formed from it which 112 help in the movement of chromatids. They form basal body, cilia, flagella, etc. Centriole is rich in tubulin and ATPase. Centrioles replicate in G2 -phase of interphase of cell cycle but do not initiate cell division. 38 The point, at which polytene chromosomes appear to be attached together, is called [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) centriole (b) centromere (c) chromomere (d) chromocentre  d  Polytene chromosomes are infact formed by pairing of two somatic homologous chromosomes which undergo repeated endomitosis, forming a number of strands. These strands remain attached to a common large chromocentre of all polytene chromosomes and are rich in heterochromatin. 39 Best stage to observe shape, size and number of chromosomes is [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) interphase (b) metaphase (c) prophase (d) telophase  b  Metaphase can be characterised by the chromosomes that are least coiled which show maximum condensation and are shortest in length. It is the best stage to study the structure, size and number of chromosome in a cell. Idiogram/karyotype of chromosomes is prepared at metaphase. 40 In salivary gland chromosomes/polytene chromosomes pairing is [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) absent (b) occasional (c) formed between non-homologous chromosomes (d) formed between homologous chromosomes  d  Polytene chromosomes/salivary gland chromosomes was reported by Balbiani (1881) from cells of salivary glands of Chironomus larva (insect of Diptera group). The polytene chromosomes become giant due to the endoduplication, i.e., repeated replication of chromatids without their separation and cytokinesis. In fact, each polytene chromosome is formed by pairing of two somatic homologous chromosomes which undergo repeated endomitosis to form numerous strands attached to a common large chromocentre. 41 Number of chromatids at metaphase is [CBSE AIPMT 1992] (a) two each in mitosis and meiosis (b) two in mitosis and one in meiosis (c) two in mitosis and four in meiosis (d) one in mitosis and two in meiosis  a  In metaphase, chromosomes are thick, shortest least coiled and minimum in size. Each chromosome has its both chromatids attached at centromere, oriented at the equator of spindle apparatus. In meiotic metaphase, each chromosome with two chromatids in a bivalent is connected to the spindle pole of its side by a kinetochore microtubule instead of two as in metaphase of mitosis. 42 Mitotic anaphase differs from metaphase in possessing [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) same number of chromosomes and same number of chromatids (b) half number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids (c) half number of chromosomes and same number of chromatids (d) same number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids  d  Mitotic metaphase is the best stage to observe the structure, size and number of chromosomes in a cell. Centromeres of all chromosomes lie closely at equator and their arms in different directions towards poles. Chromosomes are shortest in metaphase but thickest in anaphase. In anaphase, centromere of each chromosome divides so that each sister chromatid now has its own centromere. Thus, mitotic anaphase differs from metaphase in possessing same number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids. 43 A bivalent consists of [CBSE AIPMT 1989] (a) two chromatids and one centromere (b) two chromatids and two centromeres (c) four chromatids and two centromeres (d) four chromatids and four centromeres  c  Each pair of homologous chromosome carrying one maternal and one paternal chromosome of similar type is called bivalent. Each chromosome has two sister chromatids and a centromere. Thus, bivalents possesses four chromatids, two centromeres. This bivalent with four chromatids is called pachytene tetrad (quadrivalent). TOPIC 3 Meiosis 44 Which stage of meiotic prophase shows terminalisation of chiasmata as its distinctive feature? [NEET 2021] (a) Leptotene (b) Zygotene (c) Diakinesis (d) Pachytene  c  Diakinesis is the final stage of meiotic prophase 1. In this stage the two homologous chromosomes do not separate completely but remain attached together at one or more points as indicated by ‘X’ arrangement known as chiasmata. The displacement of chiasmata is termed as terminalisation of chiasmata which is completed in diakinesis phase. 45 Which of the following stages of meiosis involves division of centromere? [NEET 2021] (a) Metaphase-I (b) Metaphase-lI (c) Anaphase-II (d) Telophase-II  c  During anaphase II, each pair of chromosomes is separated into two identical, independent chromosomes. The chromosomes are separated by a structure called the mitotic spindle made up of many long proteins called microtubules, which are attached to a chromosome at one end and to the pole of a cell at the other end. The sister chromatids are separated simultaneously at their centromeres. The separated chromosomes are then Cell Cycle and Cell Division 113 pulled by the spindle to opposite poles of the cell. Thus, the centromere splits, freeing the sister chromatids from each other. Other options can be explained as: In metaphase I, the homologous pair of chromosomes align on either side of the equatorial plate. During metaphase II, the centromeres of the paired chromatids align along the equatorial plate in both cells. During telophase II, the two groups of chromosome once again get enclosed by nuclear envelope. 46 During meiosis 1, in which stage synapsis takes place? [NEET (Oct.) 2020] (a) Pachytene (b) Zygotene (c) Diplotene (d) Leptotene  b  During zygotene stage of meiosis-I, chromosomes start pairing together and this process of association is called synapsis. Such paired chromosomes are called homologous chromosomes. 47 Dissolution of the synaptonemal complex occurs during [NEET (Sep.) 2020] (a) zygotene (b) diplotene (c) leptotene (d) pachytene  b  Dissolution of the synaptonemal complex occurs during diplotene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I. Prophase of meiosis-I is long and complex. It is comprised of leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis. During diplotene, at most places synaptonemal complex dissolves. 48 Match the following columns with respect to meiosis. [NEET (Sep.) 2020] Column I Column II A. Zygotene 1. Terminalisation B. Pachytene 2. Chiasmata C. Diplotene 3. Crossing over D. Diakinesis 4. Synapsis Select the correct option. A BC D (a) 4 3 2 1 (b) 1 2 4 3 (c) 2 4 3 1 (d) 3 4 1 2  a  The correct option is (a). It can be explained as follows During zygotene phase the homologous chromosomes pair or come together and forms synapsis. Crossing over takes place during pachytene stage and at each point of crossing over a chiasma is formed between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes. Chiasmata is the point of contact between the two non sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes, chiasmata becomes visible during diplotene stage. Terminalisation of chiasmata gets completed during diakinesis phase where chromosomes gets freely distributed in the cytoplasm. 49 After meiosis-I, the resultant daughter cells have [NEET (Odisha) 2019] (a) same amount of DNA as in the parent cell in S-phase (b) twice the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete (c) same amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete (d) four times the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete  b  After meiosis-I, the resultant daughter cells have twice the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete. Meiosis-I causes segregation of homologous pairs of chromosomes. However, each chromosome is double-stranded, having two sister chromatids due to DNA replication before meiosis began. 50 In meiosis crossing over is initiated at [NEET 2016, Phase I] (a) leptotene (b) zygotene (c) diplotene (d) pachytene  d  Leptotene — Condensation of chromatin Zygotene — Synapsis of homologous chromosomes Pachytene — Crossing over Diplotene — Dissolution of synaptonemal complex and appearance of chiasmata Diakinesis — Terminalisation of chiasmata 51 Match the stages of meiosis in column I to their characteristic features in column II and select the correct option using the codes given below [NEET 2016, Phase II] Column I Column II A. Pachytene 1. Pairing of homologous chromosomes B. Metaphase-I 2. Terminalisation of chiasmata C. Diakinesis 3. Crossing-over takes place D. Zygotene 4. Chromosomes align at equatorial plate  a  Various phases of meiosis and their characteristic features are Pachytene — Crossing-over takes place Metaphase-I — Chromosomes align at equatorial plate Diakinesis — Terminalisation of chiasmata Zygotene — Pairing of homologous chromosomes 52 Arrange the following events of meiosis in correct sequences. [CBSE AIPMT 2015] I. Crossing over II. Synapsis III. Terminalisation of chiasmata IV. Disapperance of nucleolus (a) II, I, IV, III (b) II, I, III, IV (c) I, II, III, IV (d) II, III, IV, I  b  The correct sequence of events of meiosis are Synapsis in zygotene ⎯→ Crossing over in pachytene ⎯→ Terminalisation of chaismata in diplotene ⎯→ Disapperance of nucleolus in diakinesis. 53 The enzyme recombinase is required at which stage of meiosis? [CBSE AIPMT 2014] (a) Pachytene (b) Zygotene (c) Diplotene (d) Diakinesis  a  Crossing over is an enzymatic process occurring during the pachytene stage of prophase-I. The enzyme involved in this process is called recombinase which aids in the recombination of genes between homologous chromosomes. 114 During zygotene stage, homologous chromosomes pair up by a process called synapsis and form a complex bivalent structure. Diplotene is marked by the dissolution of synaptonemal complex and chaisma formation. While diakinesis is marked by terminalisation of chiasmata (i.e. chiasmata shifts towards periphery of chromosome). 54 Meiosis takes place in [NEET 2013] (a) meiocyte (b) conidia (c) gemmule (d) megaspore  a  In diploid organisms, specialised cells called meiocytes (gamete mother cell) undergo meiosis. Conidia and gemmules are asexual reproductive structures found in Penicillium and sponge respectively. Megaspores are female gametes in plants which undergo sexual reproduction. 55 During gamete formation, the enzyme recombinase participates during [CBSE AIPMT 2012] (a) metaphase-I (b) anaphase-II (c) prophase-I (d) prophase-II  c  The pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I is characterised by the appearance of recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over occurs between non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. Crossing over is the exchange of genetic material between two homologous chromosomes. It is also an enzyme mediated process and the enzyme involved is called recombinase. 56 Given below is the representation of a certain event at a particular stage of a type of cell division. Which is this stage?  a  During zygotene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I, bivalent chromosomes clearly appear as tetrads. Pachytene stage is characterised by the appearance of recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over (exchange of genetic material) occurs between non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. 57 Synapsis occurs between [CBSE AIPMT 2009] (a) a male and a female gamete (b) mRNA and ribosomes (c) spindle fibres and centromere (d) two homologous chromosomes  d  In zygotene of prophase-I, homologous chromosomes pair up. This process is called synapsis. One chromosome of the pair is from the male parent and one from the female parent. 58 Crossing over that results in genetic recombination in higher organisms occur between [CBSE AIPMT 2004] (a) sister chromatids of bivalent (b) non-sister chromatids of a bivalent (c) two daughter nuclei (d) two different bivalents  b  The process of crossing over takes place in pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I. In this process some genes of two non-sister chromatids of a bivalent are exchanged. The process of crossing over is depicted Sister chromatids of one duplicate chromosome Synapsis 59 The exchange of genetic material between chromatids of paired homologous chromosomes during first meiotic division is called [CBSE AIPMT 1996] (a) transformation (b) chiasmata (c) crossing over (d) synapsis  c  In pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis, there is breakage and reunion of chromatids, it results in exchange of segments between non sister chromatids of a bivalent, known as crossing over. It leads to recombination of linked genes/alleles and is a major source of continuous type of genetic variations in sexually reproducing organisms. 60 Lampbrush chromosomes occur during [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) prophase of mitosis (b) diplotene of meiosis (c) metaphase of meiosis (d) interphase  b  Lampbrush chromosomes were reported by W Flemming (1882) and described by Ruckert (1892) from nuclei of yolk rich primary oocytes of newts and frog (amphibians). These are also found in spermatocytes of many animals. These are found in permanent diplotene stage of meiosis and do not undergo cell cycle. Each such chromosome has a double main axis made up of DNA and histones. The chromosomes are coiled and held at many places forming cross like structure called chiasmata. Loops arising laterally has uncoiled DNA which helps in rapid tr c ription and yolk synthesis. 61 Meiosis has evolutionary [CBSE AIPMT 2012] Sister chromatids of chromosome’s homologue Adjacent non-sister chromatids Centromere Crossing significance because it results in [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) genetically similar daughters (b) four daughter cells (c) eggs and sperms (d) recombinations over Chiasmata  d  Recombination takes place in meiosis (a) Prophase-I during meiosis (b) Prophase-II during meiosis (c) Prophase of mitosis (d) Both prophase and metaphase of mitosis Recombinant chromosomes Crossing Over Process but still Meiosis maintains the chromosome number constant. It produces haploid gametes by reducing the chromosome number to half. Crossing over produces new combination of linked genes and is major source of genetic variation. Cell Cycle and Cell Division 115 Also, distribution of bivalents which is at random in metaphase-I provides the secondary source of genetic variation in the organisms and is essential for speciation and evolution. 62 Meiosis-II performs [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) separation of sex chromosomes (b) synthesis of DNA and centromeres (c) separation of homologous chromosomes (d) separation of chromatids  d  Meiosis-II is homotypic or equational division similar to mitosis but occurs in haploid nuclei. Meiosis-II is essential to separate out the chromatids of diad chromosomes to bring real haploidy in amount of DNA. It also increases the number of daughter cells though the chromosome number remains the same in daughter cells as produced after meiosis-I. 63 In meiosis, the daughter cells differ from parent cell as well as amongst themselves due to [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) segregation, independent assortment and crossing over (b) segregation and crossing over (c) independent assortment and crossing over (d) segregation and independent assortment  b  The daughter cells differ from parent cell as well as amongst themselves due to the segregation and crossing over taking place in them. Meiosis-I brings gene recombinations and haploidy of number of chromosomes. Crossing over during pachytene produces new combination of genes and is the major source of new genetic variations in the sexually reproducing organisms. 64 Meiosis-I is reductional division. Meiosis-II is equational division due to [CBSE AIPMT 1988] (a) pairing of homologous chromosomes (b) crossing over (c) separation of chromatids (d) disjunction of homologous chromosomes  c  Meiosis-I is called heterotypic division as the two chromatids of a chromosome became genetically different due to the crossing over. Number of chromosomes is reduced to half, hence, called reduction division. Meiosis-II is just like mitosis but occurs in haploid nuclei, it is called homotypic or equational division as the chromosomes are distributed equally into daughter cells and chromosome number remains the same in daughter cells. 11 Transport in Plants TOPIC 1 Means of Transport!!): Centriole
   197→  B: Centromere
   198→  C: Spindle fibres
   199→  D: 2.0
   200→  Correct stored: Centrosome is found in animals, Euglena, Nitella, some fungi and members of dinoflagellate. It is found near the nucleus. Centriole is not common to mitotic cell of higher plants. Main function of centrosome is at the time of cell division when the two centrioles separate and move on two poles. Aster and spindle are formed from it which 112 help in the movement of chromatids. They form basal body, cilia, flagella, etc. Centriole is rich in tubulin and ATPase. Centrioles replicate in G2 -phase of interphase of cell cycle but do not initiate cell division. 38 The point, at which polytene chromosomes appear to be attached together, is called [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) centriole (b) centromere (c) chromomere (d) chromocentre  d  Polytene chromosomes are infact formed by pairing of two somatic homologous chromosomes which undergo repeated endomitosis, forming a number of strands. These strands remain attached to a common large chromocentre of all polytene chromosomes and are rich in heterochromatin. 39 Best stage to observe shape, size and number of chromosomes is [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) interphase (b) metaphase (c) prophase (d) telophase  b  Metaphase can be characterised by the chromosomes that are least coiled which show maximum condensation and are shortest in length. It is the best stage to study the structure, size and number of chromosome in a cell. Idiogram/karyotype of chromosomes is prepared at metaphase. 40 In salivary gland chromosomes/polytene chromosomes pairing is [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) absent (b) occasional (c) formed between non-homologous chromosomes (d) formed between homologous chromosomes  d  Polytene chromosomes/salivary gland chromosomes was reported by Balbiani (1881) from cells of salivary glands of Chironomus larva (insect of Diptera group). The polytene chromosomes become giant due to the endoduplication, i.e., repeated replication of chromatids without their separation and cytokinesis. In fact, each polytene chromosome is formed by pairing of two somatic homologous chromosomes which undergo repeated endomitosis to form numerous strands attached to a common large chromocentre. 41 Number of chromatids at metaphase is [CBSE AIPMT 1992] (a) two each in mitosis and meiosis (b) two in mitosis and one in meiosis (c) two in mitosis and four in meiosis (d) one in mitosis and two in meiosis  a  In metaphase, chromosomes are thick, shortest least coiled and minimum in size. Each chromosome has its both chromatids attached at centromere, oriented at the equator of spindle apparatus. In meiotic metaphase, each chromosome with two chromatids in a bivalent is connected to the spindle pole of its side by a kinetochore microtubule instead of two as in metaphase of mitosis. 42 Mitotic anaphase differs from metaphase in possessing [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) same number of chromosomes and same number of chromatids (b) half number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids (c) half number of chromosomes and same number of chromatids (d) same number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids  d  Mitotic metaphase is the best stage to observe the structure, size and number of chromosomes in a cell. Centromeres of all chromosomes lie closely at equator and their arms in different directions towards poles. Chromosomes are shortest in metaphase but thickest in anaphase. In anaphase, centromere of each chromosome divides so that each sister chromatid now has its own centromere. Thus, mitotic anaphase differs from metaphase in possessing same number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids. 43 A bivalent consists of [CBSE AIPMT 1989] (a) two chromatids and one centromere (b) two chromatids and two centromeres (c) four chromatids and two centromeres (d) four chromatids and four centromeres  c  Each pair of homologous chromosome carrying one maternal and one paternal chromosome of similar type is called bivalent. Each chromosome has two sister chromatids and a centromere. Thus, bivalents possesses four chromatids, two centromeres. This bivalent with four chromatids is called pachytene tetrad (quadrivalent). TOPIC 3 Meiosis 44 Which stage of meiotic prophase shows terminalisation of chiasmata as its distinctive feature? [NEET 2021] (a) Leptotene (b) Zygotene (c) Diakinesis (d) Pachytene  c  Diakinesis is the final stage of meiotic prophase 1. In this stage the two homologous chromosomes do not separate completely but remain attached together at one or more points as indicated by ‘X’ arrangement known as chiasmata. The displacement of chiasmata is termed as terminalisation of chiasmata which is completed in diakinesis phase. 45 Which of the following stages of meiosis involves division of centromere? [NEET 2021] (a) Metaphase-I (b) Metaphase-lI (c) Anaphase-II (d) Telophase-II  c  During anaphase II, each pair of chromosomes is separated into two identical, independent chromosomes. The chromosomes are separated by a structure called the mitotic spindle made up of many long proteins called microtubules, which are attached to a chromosome at one end and to the pole of a cell at the other end. The sister chromatids are separated simultaneously at their centromeres. The separated chromosomes are then Cell Cycle and Cell Division 113 pulled by the spindle to opposite poles of the cell. Thus, the centromere splits, freeing the sister chromatids from each other. Other options can be explained as: In metaphase I, the homologous pair of chromosomes align on either side of the equatorial plate. During metaphase II, the centromeres of the paired chromatids align along the equatorial plate in both cells. During telophase II, the two groups of chromosome once again get enclosed by nuclear envelope. 46 During meiosis 1, in which stage synapsis takes place? [NEET (Oct.) 2020] (a) Pachytene (b) Zygotene (c) Diplotene (d) Leptotene  b  During zygotene stage of meiosis-I, chromosomes start pairing together and this process of association is called synapsis. Such paired chromosomes are called homologous chromosomes. 47 Dissolution of the synaptonemal complex occurs during [NEET (Sep.) 2020] (a) zygotene (b) diplotene (c) leptotene (d) pachytene  b  Dissolution of the synaptonemal complex occurs during diplotene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I. Prophase of meiosis-I is long and complex. It is comprised of leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis. During diplotene, at most places synaptonemal complex dissolves. 48 Match the following columns with respect to meiosis. [NEET (Sep.) 2020] Column I Column II A. Zygotene 1. Terminalisation B. Pachytene 2. Chiasmata C. Diplotene 3. Crossing over D. Diakinesis 4. Synapsis Select the correct option. A BC D (a) 4 3 2 1 (b) 1 2 4 3 (c) 2 4 3 1 (d) 3 4 1 2  a  The correct option is (a). It can be explained as follows During zygotene phase the homologous chromosomes pair or come together and forms synapsis. Crossing over takes place during pachytene stage and at each point of crossing over a chiasma is formed between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes. Chiasmata is the point of contact between the two non sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes, chiasmata becomes visible during diplotene stage. Terminalisation of chiasmata gets completed during diakinesis phase where chromosomes gets freely distributed in the cytoplasm. 49 After meiosis-I, the resultant daughter cells have [NEET (Odisha) 2019] (a) same amount of DNA as in the parent cell in S-phase (b) twice the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete (c) same amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete (d) four times the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete  b  After meiosis-I, the resultant daughter cells have twice the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete. Meiosis-I causes segregation of homologous pairs of chromosomes. However, each chromosome is double-stranded, having two sister chromatids due to DNA replication before meiosis began. 50 In meiosis crossing over is initiated at [NEET 2016, Phase I] (a) leptotene (b) zygotene (c) diplotene (d) pachytene  d  Leptotene — Condensation of chromatin Zygotene — Synapsis of homologous chromosomes Pachytene — Crossing over Diplotene — Dissolution of synaptonemal complex and appearance of chiasmata Diakinesis — Terminalisation of chiasmata 51 Match the stages of meiosis in column I to their characteristic features in column II and select the correct option using the codes given below [NEET 2016, Phase II] Column I Column II A. Pachytene 1. Pairing of homologous chromosomes B. Metaphase-I 2. Terminalisation of chiasmata C. Diakinesis 3. Crossing-over takes place D. Zygotene 4. Chromosomes align at equatorial plate  a  Various phases of meiosis and their characteristic features are Pachytene — Crossing-over takes place Metaphase-I — Chromosomes align at equatorial plate Diakinesis — Terminalisation of chiasmata Zygotene — Pairing of homologous chromosomes 52 Arrange the following events of meiosis in correct sequences. [CBSE AIPMT 2015] I. Crossing over II. Synapsis III. Terminalisation of chiasmata IV. Disapperance of nucleolus (a) II, I, IV, III (b) II, I, III, IV (c) I, II, III, IV (d) II, III, IV, I  b  The correct sequence of events of meiosis are Synapsis in zygotene ⎯→ Crossing over in pachytene ⎯→ Terminalisation of chaismata in diplotene ⎯→ Disapperance of nucleolus in diakinesis. 53 The enzyme recombinase is required at which stage of meiosis? [CBSE AIPMT 2014] (a) Pachytene (b) Zygotene (c) Diplotene (d) Diakinesis  a  Crossing over is an enzymatic process occurring during the pachytene stage of prophase-I. The enzyme involved in this process is called recombinase which aids in the recombination of genes between homologous chromosomes. 114 During zygotene stage, homologous chromosomes pair up by a process called synapsis and form a complex bivalent structure. Diplotene is marked by the dissolution of synaptonemal complex and chaisma formation. While diakinesis is marked by terminalisation of chiasmata (i.e. chiasmata shifts towards periphery of chromosome). 54 Meiosis takes place in [NEET 2013] (a) meiocyte (b) conidia (c) gemmule (d) megaspore  a  In diploid organisms, specialised cells called meiocytes (gamete mother cell) undergo meiosis. Conidia and gemmules are asexual reproductive structures found in Penicillium and sponge respectively. Megaspores are female gametes in plants which undergo sexual reproduction. 55 During gamete formation, the enzyme recombinase participates during [CBSE AIPMT 2012] (a) metaphase-I (b) anaphase-II (c) prophase-I (d) prophase-II  c  The pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I is characterised by the appearance of recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over occurs between non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. Crossing over is the exchange of genetic material between two homologous chromosomes. It is also an enzyme mediated process and the enzyme involved is called recombinase. 56 Given below is the representation of a certain event at a particular stage of a type of cell division. Which is this stage?  a  During zygotene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I, bivalent chromosomes clearly appear as tetrads. Pachytene stage is characterised by the appearance of recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over (exchange of genetic material) occurs between non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. 57 Synapsis occurs between [CBSE AIPMT 2009] (a) a male and a female gamete (b) mRNA and ribosomes (c) spindle fibres and centromere (d) two homologous chromosomes  d  In zygotene of prophase-I, homologous chromosomes pair up. This process is called synapsis. One chromosome of the pair is from the male parent and one from the female parent. 58 Crossing over that results in genetic recombination in higher organisms occur between [CBSE AIPMT 2004] (a) sister chromatids of bivalent (b) non-sister chromatids of a bivalent (c) two daughter nuclei (d) two different bivalents  b  The process of crossing over takes place in pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I. In this process some genes of two non-sister chromatids of a bivalent are exchanged. The process of crossing over is depicted Sister chromatids of one duplicate chromosome Synapsis 59 The exchange of genetic material between chromatids of paired homologous chromosomes during first meiotic division is called [CBSE AIPMT 1996] (a) transformation (b) chiasmata (c) crossing over (d) synapsis  c  In pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis, there is breakage and reunion of chromatids, it results in exchange of segments between non sister chromatids of a bivalent, known as crossing over. It leads to recombination of linked genes/alleles and is a major source of continuous type of genetic variations in sexually reproducing organisms. 60 Lampbrush chromosomes occur during [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) prophase of mitosis (b) diplotene of meiosis (c) metaphase of meiosis (d) interphase  b  Lampbrush chromosomes were reported by W Flemming (1882) and described by Ruckert (1892) from nuclei of yolk rich primary oocytes of newts and frog (amphibians). These are also found in spermatocytes of many animals. These are found in permanent diplotene stage of meiosis and do not undergo cell cycle. Each such chromosome has a double main axis made up of DNA and histones. The chromosomes are coiled and held at many places forming cross like structure called chiasmata. Loops arising laterally has uncoiled DNA which helps in rapid tr c ription and yolk synthesis. 61 Meiosis has evolutionary [CBSE AIPMT 2012] Sister chromatids of chromosome’s homologue Adjacent non-sister chromatids Centromere Crossing significance because it results in [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) genetically similar daughters (b) four daughter cells (c) eggs and sperms (d) recombinations over Chiasmata  d  Recombination takes place in meiosis (a) Prophase-I during meiosis (b) Prophase-II during meiosis (c) Prophase of mitosis (d) Both prophase and metaphase of mitosis Recombinant chromosomes Crossing Over Process but still Meiosis maintains the chromosome number constant. It produces haploid gametes by reducing the chromosome number to half. Crossing over produces new combination of linked genes and is major source of genetic variation. Cell Cycle and Cell Division 115 Also, distribution of bivalents which is at random in metaphase-I provides the secondary source of genetic variation in the organisms and is essential for speciation and evolution. 62 Meiosis-II performs [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) separation of sex chromosomes (b) synthesis of DNA and centromeres (c) separation of homologous chromosomes (d) separation of chromatids  d  Meiosis-II is homotypic or equational division similar to mitosis but occurs in haploid nuclei. Meiosis-II is essential to separate out the chromatids of diad chromosomes to bring real haploidy in amount of DNA. It also increases the number of daughter cells though the chromosome number remains the same in daughter cells as produced after meiosis-I. 63 In meiosis, the daughter cells differ from parent cell as well as amongst themselves due to [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) segregation, independent assortment and crossing over (b) segregation and crossing over (c) independent assortment and crossing over (d) segregation and independent assortment  b  The daughter cells differ from parent cell as well as amongst themselves due to the segregation and crossing over taking place in them. Meiosis-I brings gene recombinations and haploidy of number of chromosomes. Crossing over during pachytene produces new combination of genes and is the major source of new genetic variations in the sexually reproducing organisms. 64 Meiosis-I is reductional division. Meiosis-II is equational division due to [CBSE AIPMT 1988] (a) pairing of homologous chromosomes (b) crossing over (c) separation of chromatids (d) disjunction of homologous chromosomes  c  Meiosis-I is called heterotypic division as the two chromatids of a chromosome became genetically different due to the crossing over. Number of chromosomes is reduced to half, hence, called reduction division. Meiosis-II is just like mitosis but occurs in haploid nuclei, it is called homotypic or equational division as the chromosomes are distributed equally into daughter cells and chromosome number remains the same in daughter cells. 11 Transport in Plants TOPIC 1 Means of Transport -> !!UNUSUAL:Centrosome is found in animals, Euglena, Nitella, some fungi and members of dinoflagellate. It is found near the nucleus. Centriole is not common to mitotic cell of higher plants. Main function of centrosome is at the time of cell division when the two centrioles separate and move on two poles. Aster and spindle are formed from it which 112 help in the movement of chromatids. They form basal body, cilia, flagella, etc. Centriole is rich in tubulin and ATPase. Centrioles replicate in G2 -phase of interphase of cell cycle but do not initiate cell division. 38 The point, at which polytene chromosomes appear to be attached together, is called [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) centriole (b) centromere (c) chromomere (d) chromocentre  d  Polytene chromosomes are infact formed by pairing of two somatic homologous chromosomes which undergo repeated endomitosis, forming a number of strands. These strands remain attached to a common large chromocentre of all polytene chromosomes and are rich in heterochromatin. 39 Best stage to observe shape, size and number of chromosomes is [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) interphase (b) metaphase (c) prophase (d) telophase  b  Metaphase can be characterised by the chromosomes that are least coiled which show maximum condensation and are shortest in length. It is the best stage to study the structure, size and number of chromosome in a cell. Idiogram/karyotype of chromosomes is prepared at metaphase. 40 In salivary gland chromosomes/polytene chromosomes pairing is [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) absent (b) occasional (c) formed between non-homologous chromosomes (d) formed between homologous chromosomes  d  Polytene chromosomes/salivary gland chromosomes was reported by Balbiani (1881) from cells of salivary glands of Chironomus larva (insect of Diptera group). The polytene chromosomes become giant due to the endoduplication, i.e., repeated replication of chromatids without their separation and cytokinesis. In fact, each polytene chromosome is formed by pairing of two somatic homologous chromosomes which undergo repeated endomitosis to form numerous strands attached to a common large chromocentre. 41 Number of chromatids at metaphase is [CBSE AIPMT 1992] (a) two each in mitosis and meiosis (b) two in mitosis and one in meiosis (c) two in mitosis and four in meiosis (d) one in mitosis and two in meiosis  a  In metaphase, chromosomes are thick, shortest least coiled and minimum in size. Each chromosome has its both chromatids attached at centromere, oriented at the equator of spindle apparatus. In meiotic metaphase, each chromosome with two chromatids in a bivalent is connected to the spindle pole of its side by a kinetochore microtubule instead of two as in metaphase of mitosis. 42 Mitotic anaphase differs from metaphase in possessing [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) same number of chromosomes and same number of chromatids (b) half number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids (c) half number of chromosomes and same number of chromatids (d) same number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids  d  Mitotic metaphase is the best stage to observe the structure, size and number of chromosomes in a cell. Centromeres of all chromosomes lie closely at equator and their arms in different directions towards poles. Chromosomes are shortest in metaphase but thickest in anaphase. In anaphase, centromere of each chromosome divides so that each sister chromatid now has its own centromere. Thus, mitotic anaphase differs from metaphase in possessing same number of chromosomes and half number of chromatids. 43 A bivalent consists of [CBSE AIPMT 1989] (a) two chromatids and one centromere (b) two chromatids and two centromeres (c) four chromatids and two centromeres (d) four chromatids and four centromeres  c  Each pair of homologous chromosome carrying one maternal and one paternal chromosome of similar type is called bivalent. Each chromosome has two sister chromatids and a centromere. Thus, bivalents possesses four chromatids, two centromeres. This bivalent with four chromatids is called pachytene tetrad (quadrivalent). TOPIC 3 Meiosis 44 Which stage of meiotic prophase shows terminalisation of chiasmata as its distinctive feature? [NEET 2021] (a) Leptotene (b) Zygotene (c) Diakinesis (d) Pachytene  c  Diakinesis is the final stage of meiotic prophase 1. In this stage the two homologous chromosomes do not separate completely but remain attached together at one or more points as indicated by ‘X’ arrangement known as chiasmata. The displacement of chiasmata is termed as terminalisation of chiasmata which is completed in diakinesis phase. 45 Which of the following stages of meiosis involves division of centromere? [NEET 2021] (a) Metaphase-I (b) Metaphase-lI (c) Anaphase-II (d) Telophase-II  c  During anaphase II, each pair of chromosomes is separated into two identical, independent chromosomes. The chromosomes are separated by a structure called the mitotic spindle made up of many long proteins called microtubules, which are attached to a chromosome at one end and to the pole of a cell at the other end. The sister chromatids are separated simultaneously at their centromeres. The separated chromosomes are then Cell Cycle and Cell Division 113 pulled by the spindle to opposite poles of the cell. Thus, the centromere splits, freeing the sister chromatids from each other. Other options can be explained as: In metaphase I, the homologous pair of chromosomes align on either side of the equatorial plate. During metaphase II, the centromeres of the paired chromatids align along the equatorial plate in both cells. During telophase II, the two groups of chromosome once again get enclosed by nuclear envelope. 46 During meiosis 1, in which stage synapsis takes place? [NEET (Oct.) 2020] (a) Pachytene (b) Zygotene (c) Diplotene (d) Leptotene  b  During zygotene stage of meiosis-I, chromosomes start pairing together and this process of association is called synapsis. Such paired chromosomes are called homologous chromosomes. 47 Dissolution of the synaptonemal complex occurs during [NEET (Sep.) 2020] (a) zygotene (b) diplotene (c) leptotene (d) pachytene  b  Dissolution of the synaptonemal complex occurs during diplotene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I. Prophase of meiosis-I is long and complex. It is comprised of leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis. During diplotene, at most places synaptonemal complex dissolves. 48 Match the following columns with respect to meiosis. [NEET (Sep.) 2020] Column I Column II A. Zygotene 1. Terminalisation B. Pachytene 2. Chiasmata C. Diplotene 3. Crossing over D. Diakinesis 4. Synapsis Select the correct option. A BC D (a) 4 3 2 1 (b) 1 2 4 3 (c) 2 4 3 1 (d) 3 4 1 2  a  The correct option is (a). It can be explained as follows During zygotene phase the homologous chromosomes pair or come together and forms synapsis. Crossing over takes place during pachytene stage and at each point of crossing over a chiasma is formed between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes. Chiasmata is the point of contact between the two non sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes, chiasmata becomes visible during diplotene stage. Terminalisation of chiasmata gets completed during diakinesis phase where chromosomes gets freely distributed in the cytoplasm. 49 After meiosis-I, the resultant daughter cells have [NEET (Odisha) 2019] (a) same amount of DNA as in the parent cell in S-phase (b) twice the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete (c) same amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete (d) four times the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete  b  After meiosis-I, the resultant daughter cells have twice the amount of DNA in comparison to haploid gamete. Meiosis-I causes segregation of homologous pairs of chromosomes. However, each chromosome is double-stranded, having two sister chromatids due to DNA replication before meiosis began. 50 In meiosis crossing over is initiated at [NEET 2016, Phase I] (a) leptotene (b) zygotene (c) diplotene (d) pachytene  d  Leptotene — Condensation of chromatin Zygotene — Synapsis of homologous chromosomes Pachytene — Crossing over Diplotene — Dissolution of synaptonemal complex and appearance of chiasmata Diakinesis — Terminalisation of chiasmata 51 Match the stages of meiosis in column I to their characteristic features in column II and select the correct option using the codes given below [NEET 2016, Phase II] Column I Column II A. Pachytene 1. Pairing of homologous chromosomes B. Metaphase-I 2. Terminalisation of chiasmata C. Diakinesis 3. Crossing-over takes place D. Zygotene 4. Chromosomes align at equatorial plate  a  Various phases of meiosis and their characteristic features are Pachytene — Crossing-over takes place Metaphase-I — Chromosomes align at equatorial plate Diakinesis — Terminalisation of chiasmata Zygotene — Pairing of homologous chromosomes 52 Arrange the following events of meiosis in correct sequences. [CBSE AIPMT 2015] I. Crossing over II. Synapsis III. Terminalisation of chiasmata IV. Disapperance of nucleolus (a) II, I, IV, III (b) II, I, III, IV (c) I, II, III, IV (d) II, III, IV, I  b  The correct sequence of events of meiosis are Synapsis in zygotene ⎯→ Crossing over in pachytene ⎯→ Terminalisation of chaismata in diplotene ⎯→ Disapperance of nucleolus in diakinesis. 53 The enzyme recombinase is required at which stage of meiosis? [CBSE AIPMT 2014] (a) Pachytene (b) Zygotene (c) Diplotene (d) Diakinesis  a  Crossing over is an enzymatic process occurring during the pachytene stage of prophase-I. The enzyme involved in this process is called recombinase which aids in the recombination of genes between homologous chromosomes. 114 During zygotene stage, homologous chromosomes pair up by a process called synapsis and form a complex bivalent structure. Diplotene is marked by the dissolution of synaptonemal complex and chaisma formation. While diakinesis is marked by terminalisation of chiasmata (i.e. chiasmata shifts towards periphery of chromosome). 54 Meiosis takes place in [NEET 2013] (a) meiocyte (b) conidia (c) gemmule (d) megaspore  a  In diploid organisms, specialised cells called meiocytes (gamete mother cell) undergo meiosis. Conidia and gemmules are asexual reproductive structures found in Penicillium and sponge respectively. Megaspores are female gametes in plants which undergo sexual reproduction. 55 During gamete formation, the enzyme recombinase participates during [CBSE AIPMT 2012] (a) metaphase-I (b) anaphase-II (c) prophase-I (d) prophase-II  c  The pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I is characterised by the appearance of recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over occurs between non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. Crossing over is the exchange of genetic material between two homologous chromosomes. It is also an enzyme mediated process and the enzyme involved is called recombinase. 56 Given below is the representation of a certain event at a particular stage of a type of cell division. Which is this stage?  a  During zygotene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I, bivalent chromosomes clearly appear as tetrads. Pachytene stage is characterised by the appearance of recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over (exchange of genetic material) occurs between non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. 57 Synapsis occurs between [CBSE AIPMT 2009] (a) a male and a female gamete (b) mRNA and ribosomes (c) spindle fibres and centromere (d) two homologous chromosomes  d  In zygotene of prophase-I, homologous chromosomes pair up. This process is called synapsis. One chromosome of the pair is from the male parent and one from the female parent. 58 Crossing over that results in genetic recombination in higher organisms occur between [CBSE AIPMT 2004] (a) sister chromatids of bivalent (b) non-sister chromatids of a bivalent (c) two daughter nuclei (d) two different bivalents  b  The process of crossing over takes place in pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis-I. In this process some genes of two non-sister chromatids of a bivalent are exchanged. The process of crossing over is depicted Sister chromatids of one duplicate chromosome Synapsis 59 The exchange of genetic material between chromatids of paired homologous chromosomes during first meiotic division is called [CBSE AIPMT 1996] (a) transformation (b) chiasmata (c) crossing over (d) synapsis  c  In pachytene stage of prophase-I of meiosis, there is breakage and reunion of chromatids, it results in exchange of segments between non sister chromatids of a bivalent, known as crossing over. It leads to recombination of linked genes/alleles and is a major source of continuous type of genetic variations in sexually reproducing organisms. 60 Lampbrush chromosomes occur during [CBSE AIPMT 1995] (a) prophase of mitosis (b) diplotene of meiosis (c) metaphase of meiosis (d) interphase  b  Lampbrush chromosomes were reported by W Flemming (1882) and described by Ruckert (1892) from nuclei of yolk rich primary oocytes of newts and frog (amphibians). These are also found in spermatocytes of many animals. These are found in permanent diplotene stage of meiosis and do not undergo cell cycle. Each such chromosome has a double main axis made up of DNA and histones. The chromosomes are coiled and held at many places forming cross like structure called chiasmata. Loops arising laterally has uncoiled DNA which helps in rapid tr c ription and yolk synthesis. 61 Meiosis has evolutionary [CBSE AIPMT 2012] Sister chromatids of chromosome’s homologue Adjacent non-sister chromatids Centromere Crossing significance because it results in [CBSE AIPMT 1994] (a) genetically similar daughters (b) four daughter cells (c) eggs and sperms (d) recombinations over Chiasmata  d  Recombination takes place in meiosis (a) Prophase-I during meiosis (b) Prophase-II during meiosis (c) Prophase of mitosis (d) Both prophase and metaphase of mitosis Recombinant chromosomes Crossing Over Process but still Meiosis maintains the chromosome number constant. It produces haploid gametes by reducing the chromosome number to half. Crossing over produces new combination of linked genes and is major source of genetic variation. Cell Cycle and Cell Division 115 Also, distribution of bivalents which is at random in metaphase-I provides the secondary source of genetic variation in the organisms and is essential for speciation and evolution. 62 Meiosis-II performs [CBSE AIPMT 1993] (a) separation of sex chromosomes (b) synthesis of DNA and centromeres (c) separation of homologous chromosomes (d) separation of chromatids  d  Meiosis-II is homotypic or equational division similar to mitosis but occurs in haploid nuclei. Meiosis-II is essential to separate out the chromatids of diad chromosomes to bring real haploidy in amount of DNA. It also increases the number of daughter cells though the chromosome number remains the same in daughter cells as produced after meiosis-I. 63 In meiosis, the daughter cells differ from parent cell as well as amongst themselves due to [CBSE AIPMT 1991] (a) segregation, independent assortment and crossing over (b) segregation and crossing over (c) independent assortment and crossing over (d) segregation and independent assortment  b  The daughter cells differ from parent cell as well as amongst themselves due to the segregation and crossing over taking place in them. Meiosis-I brings gene recombinations and haploidy of number of chromosomes. Crossing over during pachytene produces new combination of genes and is the major source of new genetic variations in the sexually reproducing organisms. 64 Meiosis-I is reductional division. Meiosis-II is equational division due to [CBSE AIPMT 1988] (a) pairing of homologous chromosomes (b) crossing over (c) separation of chromatids (d) disjunction of homologous chromosomes  c  Meiosis-I is called heterotypic division as the two chromatids of a chromosome became genetically different due to the crossing over. Number of chromosomes is reduced to half, hence, called reduction division. Meiosis-II is just like mitosis but occurs in haploid nuclei, it is called homotypic or equational division as the chromosomes are distributed equally into daughter cells and chromosome number remains the same in daughter cells. 11 Transport in Plants TOPIC 1 Means of Transport!!

[showing lines 1-200 of 1603; use offset=201 with limit to continue reading]